GUNMAN IN MIAMI KILLS 8 IN RAMPAGE
A man described by neighbors as ''quiet and eccentric'' entered a Miami machine shop today, killed eight persons and wounded three with a shotgun, the police said. Witnesses said the gunman, identified as Carl Brown, 51 years old, then calmly left the scene on a bicycle. Six blocks away he was run down and killed by a car carrying men who had chased him from the scene, the police said. The police said that Mr. Brown had apparently visited the machine shop, Bob Moore's Welding and Machine Service Inc. in the industrial northwest section of Miami, on Thursday. The police said Mr. Brown had expressed his displeasure over a bill for work done on a small lawnmower engine and had ''made threatening remarks.'' Mr. Brown returned to the shop today just after 11 A.M., loaded a 12-gauge shotgun and, according to the police account, started shooting people in the shop and in the shop's office. ''He came in and just went nuts,'' said Ken Christopher, a police spokesman. Paused to Reload Witnesses said the gunman first killed six employees in the shop, pausing at least once to reload, and then shot five other people who were either nearby or outside. Of the five victims, two died instantly. The remaining three were wounded. The victims were identified by the police as Ernestine Moore, 67, the mother of the shop's owner; Magnum Moore, 78, the owner's uncle; Loni Jeffries, 53; Carl Lee, 47; Martha Steelman, 29; Juan Tres Palacios, 38; Pedro Vasques, 43, and Nelson Barrios, 46. All were employees of the shop. The wounded were identified as Carlos Vazquez Sr., 42; his son, Carlos Jr., 17, and Eduardo Lima, 30. Carlos Vazquez Sr. was discharged from Hialeah Hospital this evening, while the two others were reported in stable condition tonight. Mr. Brown's neighbors in the lower-middle-class neighborhood in Hialeah expressed shock at the news. They said Mr. Brownwas separated from his wife and child and had lost a job as an accounting instructor at Miami-Dade Community College. They described him as a ''quiet and eccentric man'' who generally kept to himself. 'Going for a Stroll' One of the few surviving witnesses to the shootings was Steve Sarnoff, a co-owner of General Metals, a company across North River Drive from the machine shop.''My partner and I were in the office and we heard the shooting start,'' he said. ''He came out and reloaded and did some more shooting, then he came out and reloaded again. ''Mr. Sarnoff said that after the shootings, Mr. Brown, still carrying the shotgun, walked calmly from the shop and rode off leisurely on the bicycle. ''He got on his bike and pedaled off as if he was going for a stroll on North River Drive,'' Mr. Sarnoff said. Ernest Hammett, an employee at General Metals, said he ran a block and a half trying to flag down a car to give chase. He stopped a Lincoln Continental driven by Mark Kram, the owner of a nearby business, and the two set off in pursuit. Mr. Hammett said that when it appeared that Mr. Brown was going to aim his shotgun at the car, Mr. Kram steered the car into the bicycle. The impact knocked Mr. Brown into a utility pole and the car ran over his body.

Sixteen US Mass Shootings Happened in 2012, Leaving at Least 88 Dead
Indiscriminate gun violence happened at a wide variety of different places—the only thing predicable is the frequency.
By George ZornickTwitter December 14, 2012
President Barack Obama wipes his eye as he talks about the Connecticut elementary school shooting, Friday, December 14, 2012, in the White House briefing room in Washington. (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster)
Today’s nearly indescribable tragedy in Newtown, Connecticut, where twenty-seven people, including eighteen children, were shot to death inside an elementary school, is at least the sixteenth mass shooting to take place in America this year. The death toll is now at eighty-four.
Here is a list of every fatal mass shooting that’s taken place since January 1—defined as multi-victim shootings where those killed were chosen indiscriminately. The tragedies took place at perfectly random places—at churches, movie theatres, soccer tournaments, spas, courthouses and, now, an elementary school. But given the frequency of these awful events, perhaps in the long view their occurrence isn’t so random after all—it’s predictable.
February 22, 2012—Five people were killed in at a Korean health spa in Norcross, Georgia, when a man opened fire inside the facility in an act suspected to be related to domestic violence.
February 26, 2012—Multiple gunmen began firing into a nightclub crown in Jackson, Tennessee, killing one person and injuring 20 others.
February 27, 2012—Three students at Chardon High School in rural Ohio were killed when a classmate opened fire.
March 8, 2012—Two people were killed and seven wounded at a psychiatric hospital in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, when a gunman entered the hospital with two semiautomatic handguns and began firing.
March 31, 2012—A gunman opened fire on a crowd of mourners at a North Miami, Florida, funeral home, killing two people and injuring 12 others.
April 2, 2012—A 43-year-old former student at Oikos University in Oakland, California, walked into his former school and killed seven people, “execution-style.” Three people were wounded.
April 6, 2012—Two men went on a deadly shooting spree in Tulsa, Oklahoma, shooting black men at random in an apparently racially motivated attack. Three men died and two were wounded.
May 29, 2012—A man in Seattle, Washington, opened fire in a coffee shop and killed five people and then himself.
July 9, 2012—At a soccer tournament in Wilmington, Delaware, three people were killed, including a 16-year-old player and the event organizer, when multiple gunmen began firing shots, apparently targeting the organizer.
July 20, 2012—James Holmes enters a midnight screening of The Dark Knight Rises and opens fire with a semi-automatic weapon; twelve people are killed and fifty-eight are wounded.
August 5, 2012—A white supremacist and former Army veteran shot six people to death inside a Sikh temple in suburban Milwaukee, Wisconsin, before killing himself.
August 14, 2012—Three people were killed at Texas A&M University when a 35-year-old man went on a shooting rampage; one of the dead was a police officer.
September 27, 2012—A 36-year-old man who had just been laid off from Accent Signage Systems in Minneapolis, Minnesota, entered his former workplace and shot five people to death, and wounded three others before killing himself.
October 21, 2012—45-year-old Radcliffe Frankin Haughton shot three women to death, including his wife, Zina Haughton, and injured four others at a spa in Brookfield, Wisconsin, before killing himself.
December 11, 2012—A 22-year-old began shooting at random at a mall near Portland, Oregon, killing two people and then himself.
December 14, 2012—One man, and possibly more, murders a reported twenty-six people at an elementary school in Newtown, Connecticut, including twenty children, before killing himself. 
Nick Myers contributed to research for this post.
Editor's Note: An earlier version of this post omitted the October 21 shooting in Brookfield, Wisconsin. The post, including its title, has been updated.
Now's the time to talk about gun control. Here are three common-sense bills that should, but still can't pass Congress.

Mass shootings in the U.S. have nearly tripled since 2013, Gun Violence Archive data shows
Since the 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, the Gun Violence Archive has recorded 27 mass shootings at U.S. schools.
EXAMINED: Gun Violence in America
UVALDE, Texas -- On May 24, 19 children and two adults were killed in a mass shooting at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas.
The shooting comes a little more than a week after another mass shooting at an upstate New York grocery store and week before a gunman killed four at an Oklahoma medical building.
These are the latest in a long history of violence in the U.S. and at American schools.
A mass shooting is described as a gun violence incident in which four or more people are injured or killed, excluding the suspect or perpetrator.
In 2022 alone, as of June 2, there have been 233 mass shootings in the United States that have killed 261 people and injured 1,010 others, according to the Gun Violence Archive, a non-profit organization that collects gun violence reports from media, government, law enforcement and commercial sources. The Gun Violence Archive likely represents an undercount of incidents, as its daily analysis does not catch every single gun violence incident.
If these incidents continue at the same rate throughout the rest of 2022, the country will reach nearly 550 mass shootings this year.
But the year 2022 is not unique. As illustrated in the graphic above, mass shootings have been on the rise in the U.S. over the last decade. Weighing heavily on the national conscious is the mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., nearly 10 years ago, when 20 children between the ages of 6 and 7 and six adults were shot and killed.
Since 2013, the year after the mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, mass shootings in the United States have nearly tripled. Already, there have been 213 mass shooting incidents in 2022 -- a 50% increase from 141 shootings by May 2017 and a 150% increase from 84 by May 2013.
The number of people injured or killed does not include the suspect or perpetrator. These graphics show the number of victims across all mass shootings since 26 people were shot and killed at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut on Dec. 14, 2012.
In fact, thousands of U.S. residents have lost their lives in mass shootings in the last decade, not to mention the many more thousands injured. The number of victims of mass shootings has, like the number of shooting incidents, nearly tripled since 2013.
Mass shootings at schools
Since the 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, the Gun Violence Archive has recorded 27 mass shootings at U.S. schools, including 19 at elementary schools and eight at colleges or universities.
These shootings involved hundreds of victims, including at least 22 people killed and 16 injured just this year -- the third-highest year for school shooting deaths in the last decade. Note, this does not include all people shot or killed at U.S. schools this year, just those who were killed or injured in a mass shooting specifically. Again, a mass shooting incident involving four or more victims.
We remember the lives of the young victims of all these mass shooting incidents.
SEE MORE: Remembering the victims of the Uvalde school shooting
Gun manufacturing, gun control and politics
Even before the mass shooting at Sandy Hook, gun control was a sharply divisive issue in American politics, with massive amounts of funding for political campaigns.
In fact, in the year after Sandy Hook, gun rights lobbying increased by 1.5, from $6 million spent to $15 million, according OpenSecrets. Gun-control lobbying also increased eightfold but only jumped from $250,000 to 2 million. In 2021, the gun-rights lobby saw its highest spending year in more than two decades with $16 million.
And it is no secret that many gun-rights interests groups fund members of Congress. Since 1989, members of Congress have received millions, both from gun-rights and gun-control interests. On one side, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, has pocketed the most from gun-rights groups; on the other, Sen. Mark Kelly, D-Ariz., brought in slightly more funds from gun-control lobbyists.
The National Rifle Association alone has given many millions of dollars to Congress members, including Sen. Mitt Romney, R-Utah, who has reaped $14 million, both directly and indirectly, from the group.
And as political support continues and gun-rights lobbying increases, so does gun manufacturing. In the last 20 years, the number of firearms manufactured in the United States has nearly tripled from 3.9 million to 11.3 million, according to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. When adjusting for population increase, this amounts to more than twice as many guns manufactured in the country per 100,000 people.
According to law enforcement officials, Salvador Ramos, the 18-year-old suspected gunman in the Uvalde shooting, legally purchased two AR-15 assault rifles in the days after his 18th birthday. He carried out the massacre at the elementary school two days later.
RELATED: Beto O'Rourke's interruption at Uvalde news conference was not planned, his campaign says
Following the massacre, Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-NY, set a pair of firearms background check bills in motion, but no votes have been scheduled as of this article's writing.

In 2015, 468 people died from mass shootings
In 2015, there were more days with a mass shooting than days without a mass shooting.
December 2 marked the deadliest day of the year with the shooting in San Bernardino, California, that killed 16 and injured 19. There was also a second reported mass shooting on December 2 in Savannah, Georgia, that killed one and injured three.
Not a single month in 2015 was free from a mass shooting. Overall, 468 died from 372 mass shootings in 2015. June witnessed the greatest number of mass shootings of any given month, and June 13 saw the greatest number of mass shootings — six in all.
Compared with 2014 fatalities, the 468 deaths in 2015 mark a 22.2 percent increase from the 383 in 2014. Additionally, there were 37 more mass shootings in 2015 than in 2014. But it's hard to identify a definitive trend when it comes to the frequency and deadliness of mass shootings, as 2013 remains deadlier than both 2014 and 2015 with 502 reported fatalities from 363 mass shootings.
These numbers come from Mass Shooting Tracker, a crowdsourced database that has tracked mass shootings since 2013. The database defines a mass shooting as an event in which four or more people were shot (not necessarily killed), and, as with any crowdsourced database, it’s likely missing data or has incomplete records. I used the database to create this calendar of all known mass shootings that have occurred in 2015.
It's important to note that there is not one universally accepted definition of what constitutes a mass shooting. Mass Shooting Tracker defines a mass shooting as an event in which four or more people were shot, but others have disputed its methodology. Some counts, like the one compiled by USA Today, only track mass killings, or events in which four or more people were killed. Mother Jones also maintains a database, which like USA Today only tracks events in which four or more people were killed, but Mother Jones excludes shootings related to "gang activity, armed robbery, or domestic violence."
On the whole, regardless of differences in classification, deaths from mass shootings make up a small fraction of deaths from gun violence. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated that in 2013 alone, 33,636 people died in firearm deaths, or 92 people every day. But looking at 2013 data from the Mass Shooting Tracker, only 502 of those deaths — or 1.5 percent — were connected to mass shootings.
Most gun deaths in the United States (21,175 of 33,636 in 2013) are suicides. And most non-suicide deaths (11,208) are homicides. The rest are classified as accidents and police shootings. And while it's true that homicide rates have reached historic lows, no other developed country in the world has the same rate of gun violence as America. The US has nearly six times the gun homicide rate as Canada, more than seven times as Sweden, and nearly 16 times as Germany, according to UN data compiled by the Guardian.
This is not to say that Americans shouldn't care about mass shootings. But mass shootings are only one part of the equation in America's ongoing problem with gun violence.

2016 in Review: Mass shootings in America — a sad trend continued
Angela HillDecember 27, 2016 at 5:01 a.m.
QUOTE: “Somehow this has become routine. The reporting is routine. My response here at this podium ends up being routine. The conversation in the aftermath of it. We’ve become numb to this.” — President Barack Obama, after a mass shooting at an Oregon college in 2015
Every time it happens, there’s a collective cry of, “Not again!”
This reflexive, repetitive lament was heard far too often in the U.S. in 2016, shrieking loudly in June after the deadliest mass shooting by a single gunman in U.S. history. While pledging allegiance to ISIS, a 29-year-old security guard armed with semi-automatic weapons rampaged through the Pulse, a crowded gay nightclub in Orlando, Florida, killing 49 people and wounding 53 others — a targeted hate crime and terrorist attack rolled into one.
And while this tragedy commanded national headlines for weeks, mass shootings — those defined by the FBI as a single shooting incident in which four or more people are shot and wounded or killed — have become a sad trend, happening so often the details become blurred and shocking incidents are downright forgotten.
If you feel like it’s been happening every other day, you’re not far off target. As we approach year’s end, the nonprofit Gun Violence Archive, which tracks shootings, has logged more than 340 mass-shooting incidents in 2016 – that’s nearly one per calendar day — with a total so far of more than 400 people killed and nearly 1,400 wounded, not unlike last year’s figures. Some are domestic disputes, some workplace anger, some targeted attacks, some related to mental illness, some just plain fights that got out of hand.
Mass shootings represent just a fraction — around 2 percent — of deaths and injuries by firearms in a given year in America. But the attention they draw sets more gun battles in motion. Each big-headline incident reignites the debate on gun control, galvanizes each side and widens the deep divide on the issue.
Nationwide, several recent polls suggest public opinion has shifted in favor of stricter gun laws. Indeed, in November, California approved background checks for ammunition purchases and a ban on large-capacity ammunition magazines.
But whenever new restrictions are proposed, gun sales immediately go up and elected officials take sides. The issue played a role in the divisive presidential election, and, with a pro-gun administration, we’ll see what happens next time a firearm-fueled tragedy pierces the nation’s collective heart.
2016 MASS SHOOTINGS IN WHICH FOUR OR MORE DIED
Jan. 27 — Six people were killed at two locations in a domestic murder/suicide in Chesapeake, Va.
Feb. 19 — Four family members were shot and killed by a 24-year-old relative, who then burned their bodies, in Edgerton, Mo.
Feb. 20 — Six people died and two were wounded by an Uber driver in Kalamazoo, Mich.
Feb. 23 — Five family members died after a shooting and two fires at a home near Phoenix.
Feb. 25 — Four people were killed and 14 wounded at a workplace shooting at Excel Industries in Hesston, Kan.
Feb. 26 — Five people died during a murder/suicide when a man killed his wife, her two sons and a neighbor in Belfair, Wash.
March 7 — Five people were killed in two locations by a 36-year-old man who was captured after an interstate manhunt in Kansas City, Kan.
March 9 — Five people were killed and three wounded in an ambush during a backyard barbecue in Wilkinsburg, Penn. One of the wounded was later arrested as the prime suspect.
April 22 — Five people were killed in two locations related to a domestic dispute in Appling, Ga. The 50-year-old suspect killed himself.
April 22 — Seven adults and a 16-year-old boy were found dead at four homes in Piketon, Ohio.
May 15 — Five people were killed inside a home, then the home was set on fire in Moultrie, Ga.
June 11 — A mother and her four young children were killed after a domestic dispute in Roswell, N.M.
June 12 — Forty-nine people died and 53 were wounded in a massacre at the Pulse, a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla. The suspect, Omar Mateen, 29, was killed by law enforcement officials who raided the club after a prolonged standoff.
June 29 — A woman and three children were killed after a domestic violence dispute in Las Vegas, Nev. The suspect killed himself.
July 7 — Five police officers were killed, nine officers injured and two civilians wounded when a sniper fired on them during a public protest against police use of lethal force. The suspect, Micah Xavier Johnson, was killed after a standoff with police.
July 17 — Three police officers were killed and three wounded following an ambush and shootout at a gas station in Baton Rouge, La. The suspected shooter was killed by police.
July 23 — Four were killed, including a 3-year-old boy, after a shooting in an apartment complex in Bastrop, Texas.
Aug. 6 — A family of five, including three small children, was found dead in their Berks County, Penn., home in an apparent murder/suicide.
Aug. 20 — Five were killed in their home in Citronelle, Ala. The incident was related to a domestic abuse case.
Aug. 29 — Five were shot dead in a murder/suicide at a burn care facility for the developmentally disabled in Temecula, Calif
Sept. 8 — Four were found dead with gunshot wounds inside a burned house in Del Valle, Texas.
Sept. 23 — Five were killed after a shooting in the cosmetics section of Macy’s at the Cascade Mall in Burlington, Wash. A suspect was arrested shortly thereafter. The motive remains unclear.
Oct. 1 — One man was killed in a driveway, connected to three found shot dead in a home in Pembroke, Ill.
Oct. 15 — Four were killed and 11 wounded in a shooting at a restaurant after a dispute in Los Angeles.
Oct. 27 — Four were killed when a shooter returned to a home after a party earlier in the evening in McDonough, Ga

2017 is the deadliest year for mass killings in at least a decade
With nearly eight weeks until the end of the year, 2017 has already earned a bitter honor: It is the most deadly year for mass killings in the U.S. in more than a decade.
Sunday’s shooting at First Baptist Church of Sutherland Springs, Texas, which killed 26 people, raised the total of victims lost in mass killings this year to 208, according to USA TODAY data.
Community members gather for a vigil across the street from the First Baptist Church in Sutherland Springs, Texas, where 26 people where killed in shooting Nov. 5, 2017.
Community members gather for a vigil across the street from the First Baptist Church in Sutherland Springs, Texas, where 26 people where killed in shooting   
COURTNEY SACCO, CALLER-TIMES-USA TODAY NETWORK
The runner-up: 2016, which saw 188 people lost in such attacks.
Since 2006, USA TODAY has tracked a total of 358 mass killings that have claimed the lives of 1,883 people. The cases include shootings, stabbings, fires and blunt-force attacks, among others, in 45 states and the District of Columbia.
They date back to a Jan. 1, 2006, stabbing in Richmond, Va., that killed four people, and end, for the moment, with Sunday’s horrific attack on the Texas church.
The past two years have not offered encouraging news: Three of the five largest killings — in Sutherland Springs, Las Vegas and Orlando, Fla. — have taken place since June 2016, the data show. Taken together, the three large attacks have claimed 133 lives.
For its database, USA TODAY examined FBI data, which defines a mass killing as one claiming four or more victims, not including the perpetrator or perpetrators. USA TODAY also examined local police records and media reports and found that mass killings happen far more often than the government reports.
Firearms are most often used — the USA TODAY statistics found that 77% of mass killings involve a gun — but killers use whatever is available, from their hands to saws to baseball bats and fire. 
About one in three killers does not leave the scene alive. One in four commits suicide, while others die at the hands of police. Still more are deemed incompetent due to mental illness.
On average, USA TODAY found, mass killings take place about once every two weeks. Though large public killings, like those in Sutherland Springs, Las Vegas, Orlando, San Bernardino, Calif., and Newtown, Conn., earn headlines and national attention, the data reveal that these account for only about one in five mass killings.
Most are domestic disputes gone horribly wrong: The majority of cases are breakups, estrangements and family arguments that turn violent, the data show, often in the home. Just 19% of mass killings take place in public.
About 57% of victims know their killer, even if they aren’t the main target. One in four is a close family member: a spouse, sibling, parent or child. Nearly one in three is under 18.
Police investigating Sunday’s shooting said gunman Devin Kelley, 26, entered the church late Sunday morning dressed in black tactical gear, walked down the church’s center aisle and began "shooting on his way back out," Wilson County Sheriff Joe D. Tackitt Jr. said.
Freeman Martin of the Texas Department of Public Safety said Kelley's mother-in-law had previously attended services at the church, but was not there during Sunday's attack.
Martin said Kelley had sent threatening text messages to his mother-in-law; he noted that there was "a domestic situation going on within this family."
The shooting, Martin said, "was not racially motivated; it wasn't over religious beliefs."
Kelley was court-martialed in 2012 for assaulting his spouse and their child, receiving a bad conduct discharge from the Air Force and 12 months of confinement, Air Force officials said.

The US averaged at least 1 deadly mass shooting a month in 2018
The list of deadly shootings continues to grow.
Some of the deadliest mass shootings in the U.S. last year -- including the Parkland high school shooting and the massacre at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh -- prompted widespread national horror.
News of other mass shootings, however, seemed to have only reached local audiences. There were a number of incidents where spouses or former spouses killed their partners, and sometimes their children, in Texas, Delaware, Tennessee, Maryland and California.
The FBI does not have an official definition of a mass shooting. They do, however, define a mass killing as an incident in which three or more people, not including the suspect, are killed. For decades, that definition used four or more deaths as the metric, but that changed in 2013. Various groups and watchdog organizations keep their own lists, often using different criteria for what qualifies as a mass shooting and often sticking with the earlier threshold of four or more deaths.
The FBI defines a mass shooting as an incident in which four or more people, not including the suspect, are killed. While there is no publicly accessible federal tracker of such incidents, various groups and watchdog organizations keep their own lists, often using different criteria for what qualifies as a mass shooting.
For the list compiled by ABC News below, the incidents took place over the course of a day and involved four or more victims, not including the suspect. For instance, shooting sprees that spanned longer amounts of time were not included on this list.
Recent Stories from ABC News
All told, there were at least 20 shootings in 2018 that fit these parameters.
Deadly Mass Shootings in 2018
There are hundreds of other deadly shootings that took place across the U.S. this year that don't fit these conditions, including some that received national attention, like the shooting at a Maryland Rite Aid, or the shooting at a Chicago hospital.
In both of those incidents, three victims were killed and the suspects in each shooting also killed themselves.
But whether they made national headlines or not, the common, heartbreaking thread among the 20 incidents below was that they all happened in 2018.
1. Jan. 28: Shooting at a Pennsylvania car wash, 4 victims
PHOTO: Sierra Kolarik, the sister of Chelsie Cline, one of the victims in a mass shooting at Ed's Car Wash, is comforted, Jan. 28, 2018, in Melcroft, Pa.
Sierra Kolarik, the sister of Chelsie Cline, one of the victims in a mass shooting at Ed's Car Wash, is comforted, Jan. 28, 2018, in Melcroft, Pa.
Justin Merriman/Getty Images, FILE
Four people were killed in a shooting outside a self-service car wash in a rural western Pennsylvania town when a man wearing body armor and wielding three guns, including an AR-15 semiautomatic assault rifle, opened fire on them, according to Pennsylvania authorities.
The shooting in Melcroft in Fayette County, about 55 miles southeast of Pittsburgh, occurred at 2:52 a.m. and was described by the local district attorney as a "horrible and senseless event."
2. Jan. 28: Shooting at an apartment in Pennsylvania, 4 victims
The suspect in the shooting of four people at a Reading apartment complex is still at large, authorities said.
"We cannot remember any time in recent history when this many people were shot at one time," James Marasco Jr., the deputy chief of the Reading Police Department told the Associated Press at the time.
Capt. Paul Reilly of the Reading Police Department's investigation division told ABC News that as of Nov. 26, there have been no arrests and it is still an open investigation. They do not believe it was a random shooting, Reilly said.
3. Feb. 10: Domestic shooting spree in Kentucky, 4 victims
The suspect who killed his parents, his girlfriend and her mother allegedly struggled with drug addiction before the shooting, his pastor told The Lexington Herald Leader.
The suspect, identified as 45-year-old Joseph Nickell, killed himself after he killed his parents, James Wayne Nickell, 75, and Arlene Nickell, 70; his girlfriend Lindsey Vanhoose, 41; and her mother Patricia Vanhoose, 57.
The shooter's teenage son was reportedly at his grandparents' home where the first shooting occurred and escaped before calling 911, the paper reported.
4. Feb. 14: Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School shooting, 17 victims
PHOTO: Students are brought out of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School after a shooting at the school on Feb. 14, 2018, in Parkland, Fla. 
Students are brought out of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School after a shooting at the school on Feb. 14, 2018, in Parkland, Fla.
Joe Raedle/Getty Images
The deadliest shooting of the year took place in Parkland, Florida, when a former student opened fire and killed 17 students and school staffers.
The suspect, Nikolas Cruz, fled the scene and was later apprehended by authorities. He has been charged with 17 counts of murder and 17 counts of attempted murder in the school shooting, and is now facing new charges after allegedly attacking a deputy in jail, according to ABC affiliate WPLG.
The massacre prompted survivors to launch a national movement and Florida to change its gun laws. Held a month after the deadly shooting, the March for Our Lives became a national event and some of its student organizers -- including Emma Gonzalez, David Hogg and Jackie Corin -- have become widely recognized figures in the fight for gun reform. The group also launched a national bus tour to try to get other young people involved.
5. Feb. 26: Shootings at gas station and a home in Detroit, 4 victims
A man pulled up to a car at a Detroit gas station and opened fire on his child's mother, Ciera Bargaineer, after an altercation.
The suspect, George Davis Jr., killed Bargaineer, another woman who was in the car with her, 21-year old Kristin Thomas, and Bargaineer's father, 60-year-old Raphael Hall, ABC affiliate WXYZ reported.
Davis then reportedly fled the scene and fatally shot his cousin at a home about two miles away, according to WXYZ.
Davis shot himself after leading police on a chace, the station reported.
6. April 22: Waffle House shooting in Nashville, 4 victims
PHOTO: Family members of people killed at a Waffle House restaurant write messages on wooden crosses set up as a memorial, April 25, 2018, in Nashville, Tenn. 
Family members of people killed at a Waffle House restaurant write messages on wooden crosses set up as a memorial, April 25, 2018, in Nashville, Tenn.
Mark Humphrey/AP Photo
A bystander a deadly massacre at a Waffle House. James Shaw Jr., 29, confronted the gunman, took his gun, threw it over a counter and forced the gunman outside. The suspect, Travis Reinking, who was later apprehended by law enforcement officers and is now facing four counts of criminal homicide.
Four people were killed: Taurean Sanderlin, 29, a cook at the restaurant who was on a cigarette break and was one of the first slain in the shooting; DeEbony Groves, 21, an honor student at Belmont University in Nashville; and Akilah DaSilva, 23, a Middle Tennessee State University student. The youngest victim was 20-year-old Joe Perez, whose mother wrote in a Facebook post, "Me, my husband and sons are broken right now with this loss. Our lives are shattered."
7. May 17: Domestic violence incident in Texas, 4 victims
A woman, identified in her children's subsequent obituary as Amanda Simpson Painter, survived a shooting where she says her ex-husband Justin Painter killed their three children and her then-boyfriend, according to The Dallas Morning News.
The victims were identified as 29-year-old Seth Richardson, and Odin, 8, Caydence, 6, and Drake Painter, 4.
Amanda Simpson Painter told The Huffington Post that Justin Painter told her that he was intentionally letting her alive to live with the pain of losing her children.
8. May 18: Santa Fe High School shooting, 10 victims
PHOTO: Senior Amy Roden and her grandmother Gail embrace at a makeshift memorial for shooting victims outside Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas, May 20, 2018.
Senior Amy Roden and her grandmother Gail embrace at a makeshift memorial for shooting victims outside Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas, May 20, 2018.
Michael Stravato/The New York Times/Redux Pictures
Gov. Greg Abbott called the shooting, where 10 people were killed and 13 others injured, "one of the most heinous attacks that we've ever seen in the history of Texas schools."
The suspect, 17-year-old Dimitrios Pagourtzis, is in custody and has been charged with capital murder, officials said. The suspect allegedly wrote in journals that he wanted to carry out the shooting and then commit suicide, but he gave himself up to authorities, according to Abbott.
9. June 10: Domestic violence incident in Florida, 4 victims
PHOTO: Orlando Police Chief John Mina arrives at an afternoon news conference during a hostage standoff in Orlando, Fla., June 11, 2018.
Orlando Police Chief John Mina arrives at an afternoon news conference during a hostage standoff in Orlando, Fla., June 11, 2018.
John Raoux/AP, FILE
Four young children were fatally shot by their mother's boyfriend and the suspect shot an officer in the head after police responded to the scene.
Orlando Police Chief John Mina said the suspect, Gary Lindsey Jr., was the father of two of the children -- Dove Lindsey, 1, and Aiden Lindsey, 6. He allegedly killed them along with the other two children in the home -- Lillia Pluth, 10, and Irayan Pluth, 12 -- in the altercation. Lindsey then killed himself at the scene.
Orlando Police Department officer Kevin Valencia was shot in the head and remains in a coma more than five months after the incident, according to a spokesperson for the department.
10. June 28: Shooting at Maryland newspaper office, 5 victims
PHOTO: Police tape blocks access from a street leading to the building complex where The Capital Gazette is located in Annapolis, Md., June 29, 2018.
Police tape blocks access from a street leading to the building complex where The Capital Gazette is located in Annapolis, Md., June 29, 2018.
Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images, FILE
The shooting at a Maryland newsroom that killed five people was a targeted attack, according to local police.
The suspect, armed with a shotgun, looked for victims in the newsroom of the Capital Gazette, a daily newspaper in Annapolis, which is located in the first floor of a multi-office building, Anne Arundel Police Department Deputy Chief Bill Krampf said at the time.
Rob Hiaasen, 59, Wendi Winters, 65, Gerald Fischman, 61, John McNamara, 56, and Rebecca Smith, 34, all were shot to death, allegedly by 38-year-old Jarrod Ramos, who had a longstanding feud with the newspaper and has been charged with five counts of first-degree murder.
11. July 9: Domestic violence incident in Delaware, 4 victims
A man in Wilmington shot his wife and three children before shooting himself, the Delaware State Police reported. Julie Edwards, 41, and a 6 year-old boy, a 4 year-old girl and a 3-year-old boy were all killed by Matthew Edwards, 42, authorities said.
The case was ruled a murder-suicide by the Delaware State Police.
12. July 27: Domestic violence incident in Texas, 4 victims
A man killed his 85-year-old father, 60-year-old stepmother, her 41-year-old son and the couple's adopted 13-year-old son before turning the gun on himself, according to the Alice Echo News Journal.
The two sons, Roel Mireles, 41, and Isaiah Starry, 13, were found shot dead at their parent's residence and their parents, Ernest Starry and Thelma Montalvo, were found dead at a nursing home in Robstown, Texas, alongside their suspect son, Richard Starry, the paper reported.
13. Sept. 12: Domestic violence incident in California, 5 victims
PHOTO: A standoff between officers and Javier Casarez, 54, moments before he fatally shot himself during a confrontation in Bakersfield, Calif., Sept. 12, 2018.
This photo from video from a deputy's body camera, provided by the Kern County, Calif., Sheriff's Office, shows a standoff between officers and Javier Casarez, 5...
Kern County Sheriff's Office/AP
A man shot his ex-wife and four other people, some of whom appeared to be responding to his first gunshots, in Bakersfield.
ABC-owned station KABC reported that there were two separate but related shootings before the suspect shot himself when he was confronted by a sheriff's deputy.
The suspect, Javier Casarez, killed his ex-wife Petra Maribel Bolanos De Casarez. Their divorce was finalized in June, months after he claimed in court that he believed his wife was cheating on him, according to KABC.
14. Sept. 17: Domestic violence incident in Maryland, 4 victims
A father fatally shot his wife, his 10-year-old son and his 22-year-old stepdaughter before killing himself at their home in their Montgomery County, Maryland.
He also shot his 11-year-old daughter, who died three days later, according to NBC Washington.
NBC Washington reported that the suspect, Yong Mun Kim, left names and phone numbers of relatives for police, which suggests he planned the murder-suicide.
15. Oct. 13: Shooting at a birthday party in Texas, 4 victims
A toddler's first birthday party turned deadly following an alleged altercation between two families attending the party.
Texas Department of Public Safety officials said that four men were fatally shot and two others were wounded, with two suspects fleeing the scene, the Associated Press reported.
16. Oct. 15: Mother kills teenage children and herself in Tennessee, 4 victims
A mother killed her four teenage children in their Columbia, Tenn., home before reportedly shooting herself, local law enforcement said.
The Tennessean reports that the four children were Bo Li, 14, Meigan Lin, 14, Lia Lin, 15, and Kaileigh Lin, 17. Their mother, Cynthia Collier, 55, was found with self-inflicted gunshot wounds.
The Associated Press reported that the bodies were discovered by an adult child who returned home from work, and a local sheriff said that the teen victims had all been adopted and home schooled.
17. Oct. 27: Shooting at a Pittsburgh synagogue, 11 victims
PHOTO: Rabbi Eli Wilansky lights a candle after a mass shooting at Tree of Life  Synagogue in Pittsburgh, Oct. 27, 2018. 
Rabbi Eli Wilansky lights a candle after a mass shooting at Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh, Oct. 27, 2018.
Steph Chambers/Pittsburgh Post-Gazette via AP
Eleven worshipers, including a 97-year-old woman, were gunned down inside the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh's Squirrel Hill neighborhood in what is believed to be the deadliest attack on Jews in America.
"Words escape me of what you can say," said Rabbi Jeffrey Myers, who was officiating a service when a gunman started shooting. "They were all beautiful, wonderful, good decent people. Hate was not in their vocabulary."
18. Nov. 7: Shooting at a California bar, 12 victims
PHOTO: People comfort each other, Nov. 8, 2018, after a mass shooting at the Borderline Bar &amp; Grill in Thousand Oaks late Wednesday night.
People comfort each other, Nov. 8, 2018, after a mass shooting at the Borderline Bar & Grill in Thousand Oaks late Wednesday night.
Wally Skalij/Los Angeles Times/Polaris
At least 12 people, including a police officer, were killed when a gunman opened fire in a packed Southern California bar during its "college night," leaving the community of Thousand Oaks in shock and in mourning.
The lone suspect, 28-year-old Ian David Long, was found dead inside the Borderline Bar & Grill after the overnight shooting, Ventura County Sheriff Geoff Dean said. Authorities believe he shot himself.
19. Nov. 19: Drug-related shooting in Philadelphia, 4 victims
Four people were killed in what was described by the Associated Press as a drug sale gone awry in Philadelphia.
The victims were identified as William Taylor and Akeen Mattox, along with sisters Tiyaniah Rakele Hopkins and Yaleah Hall.
"At a minimum, three people were collateral damage in a horrific incident," police commissioner Richard Ross said, according to the AP.
Philadelphia police confirmed that the four suspects -- Jahlil Porter, Robert Long, Nasir Moss Robertson, and Keith Garner -- are facing murder, robbery, and criminal conspiracy charges among others.
20. Dec. 28: Boyfriend kills girlfriend, her kids, and her mother in Missouri, 4 victims
PHOTO: Barb Moran places a stuffed animal in the center of a memorial in honor of Kate Kasten and her children in St. Charles, Mo., Dec. 30, 2018. 
Barb Moran places a stuffed animal in the center of a memorial in honor of Kate Kasten, her children, Zoe Kasten, 8, and Jonathan Kasten, 10, and Kate Kasten's...
Laurie Skrivan/St. Louis Post-Dispatch via AP
The suspect, Richard Darren Emery, was arrested on suspicion of killing his live-in girlfriend, Kate Kasten, her son Jonathan Kasten, 10, her daughter Zoe Kasten, 8, and her mother Jane Moeckel.
Emery lived with Kate Kasten and her two children, whose father Kory died about two years ago after a years-long battle with cancer. Jane Moeckel -- Kate Kasten’s mother -- was staying with Emery and Kasten temporarily as she recovered from knee surgery, according to Kasten's father and Moeckel's ex-husband Rick Moeckel, who spoke to ABC News.
“The whole thing is confusing,” said Rick Moeckel, who also lost two grandchildren.
He added that he remembered Emergy as a "nice guy."
Emery was arrested after avoiding police for several hours -- attempting to steal a woman’s car and attacking her -- before being apprehended at a convenience store. He now faces 15 charges -- including four counts of first-degree murder, seven counts of armed criminal action, three counts of first-degree assault, and one count of attempted robbery.

There were more mass shootings than days in 2019
There were more mass shootings across the U.S. in 2019 than there were days in the year, according to a gun violence research group. 2019 had the highest number of mass shootings in any year since the research group started keeping track. 
By the end of 2019, there were 417 mass shootings in the U.S., according to data from the nonprofit Gun Violence Archive (GVA), which tracks every mass shooting in the country. Thirty-one of those shootings were mass murders. 
GVA defines a mass shooting as any incident in which at least four people are shot, excluding the shooter. The group also tracks mass murders as defined by the FBI — incidents in which at least four people are killed. The FBI does not have a formal definition of a mass shooting.
The toll of 417 mass shootings includes several high-profile, mass casualty attacks, some of which happened within 24 hours of each other:
A shootout at a kosher grocery store in Jersey City, New Jersey, on December 10. Three people in the store were killed and three others wounded, including two police officers. The two attackers also died in the shootout. The attackers also shot and killed a police detective at a nearby cemetery before the store attack. 
A shooting near New Orleans' French Quarter on December 1 that left 10 people injured.
A shooting at Saugus High School in Santa Clarita, California, on November 14, which left two teenage students dead and three wounded. The suspect, a 16-year-old student, shot himself in the head and died the next day.
A drive-by shooting spree in Odessa and Midland, Texas, on August 31, with seven people killed and 24 wounded
A shooting in a historic district of Dayton, Ohio, on August 4, with nine people killed and 27 injured.
A shooting at Walmart in El Paso, Texas, on August 3, with 22 people killed and 24 wounded. It was the deadliest shooting of the year, and the seventh-deadliest in modern U.S. history.
A shooting at a playground hosting a community festival in the Brownsville neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York, on July 28. One person was killed and 11 were wounded.
A shooting at the Gilroy Garlic Festival in the San Francisco Bay Area on July 28. Three people were killed — two of them children — and 12 were wounded. Police shot and killed the gunman.
A shooting in a municipal building in Virginia Beach, on May 31, where a former city employee killed 12 people and wounded four.
The GVA said there was a total of 15,381 gun deaths — including homicides, suicides and accidents — and 29,568 injuries in 2019.
In the end, 2019 had the highest number of mass shootings in any year since 2014, when the Gun Violence Archive started its count. It has surpassed the prior record of 382 mass shootings in 2016. The GVA reported 346 mass shootings in 2017 and 337 in 2018

Shootings never stopped during the pandemic: 2020 was the deadliest gun violence year in decades
Until two lethal rampages this month, mass shootings had largely been absent from headlines during the coronavirus pandemic. But people were still dying — at a record rate.
In 2020, gun violence killed nearly 20,000 Americans, according to data from the Gun Violence Archive, more than any other year in at least two decades. An additional 24,000 people died by suicide with a gun.
The vast majority of these tragedies happen far from the glare of the national spotlight, unfolding instead in homes or on city streets and — like the covid-19 crisis — disproportionately affecting communities of color.
Last week’s shootings at spas in the Atlanta area and Monday’s shooting at a grocery store in Boulder, Colo., killed a combined 18 people and rejuvenated a national effort to overhaul gun laws. But high-profile mass shootings such as those tend to overshadow the instances of everyday violence that account for most gun deaths, potentially clouding some people’s understanding of the problem and complicating the country’s response, experts say.
“There are many communities across this country that are dealing with ever-present gun violence that is just part of their daily experience,” said Mark Barden, a co-founder of the gun violence prevention group Sandy Hook Promise. “It doesn’t get the support, the spotlight, the national attention. People don’t understand that it’s continuous and it’s on the rise.”
Shooting deaths in 2020 outpaced the next-highest recent year, 2017, by more than 3,600. The rise resembles other alarming trends: Last year, the United States saw the highest one-year increase in homicides since it began keeping records, with the country’s largest cities suffering a 30 percent spike. Gunshot injuries also rose dramatically, to nearly 40,000, over 8,000 more than in 2017.
“More than 100 Americans are killed daily by gun violence,” Ronnie Dunn, a professor of urban studies at Cleveland State University, said, using a figure that includes suicides. “The majority are in Black and Brown communities. We don’t really focus on gun violence until we have these mass shootings, but it’s an ongoing, chronic problem that affects a significant portion of our society.”
Researchers say the pandemic probably fueled the increases in several ways. The spread of the coronavirus hampered anti-crime efforts, and the attendant shutdowns compounded unemployment and stress at a time when schools and other community programs were closed or online. They also note the apparent collapse of public confidence in law enforcement that followed the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis.
Covid-19 and the protests over police brutality also led to a surge of firearm sales. In 2020, people purchased about 23 million guns, a 64 percent increase over 2019 sales, according to a Washington Post analysis of federal data on gun background checks.
Dunn pointed to this flood of firearms as the most detrimental factor in the fight to curb gun violence. When shootings become “the soundscape of inner-city neighborhoods,” he said, “it increases anxiety and stress and creates toxic stress.” Dunn compared the effect to post-traumatic stress disorder akin to what war veterans experience.
One recent study, from the Educational Fund to Stop Gun Violence, called gun violence “a public health crisis decades in the making.” An analysis of data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found Black males between the ages of 15 and 34 accounted for 37 percent of gun homicides, even though they made up 2 percent of the U.S. population — a rate 20 times that of White males of the same age.
Failing to focus on this more common form of gun violence obscures the severity of the crisis, Dunn said.
Nicole Hockley is another co-founder of Sandy Hook Promise, who, like Barden, lost her first-grade son in a mass shooting at their elementary school in Newtown, Conn. She said she still recalls, with remorse, a time when she didn’t see the far-reaching impact of gun violence. When a gunman killed 12 people at a movie theater in Aurora, Colo., Hockley was ironing clothes in her living room.
“When I heard it on the news, my heart broke, I was so sad,” she said. “But then I got on with my life.”
Five months later, her son was killed at school.
“If we think about how many people are dying every single day, and we think about how would that be in our family or our community, perhaps that would motivate us to take ongoing action rather than spikes of action when something happens,” Hockley said.
“Even if it’s not happening in your community, it’s happening in the community of America.”
Across the country, the swell of shootings has not spared the young.
Nearly 300 children were shot and killed in 2020, according to Gun Violence Archive data, a 50 percent increase from the previous year. More than 5,100 kids and teens 17 and younger were killed or injured last year — over 1,000 more than any other year since 2014, when the website began tracking it.
The increase is especially striking because it occurred in a year when most children weren’t attending class in person and were spared deadly school shootings. Experts say it highlights the severity of suicide and domestic violence.
Sandy Hook Promise’s crisis center is fielding a record number of calls from young people contemplating suicide or witnessing other violence, Barden said.
“For a lot of students in our country, home is not the safest place to be,” he said.
Even though the rate of mass shootings slowed last year, several occurred before the killings in Atlanta and Boulder, according to The Post’s public mass shootings database.
Twenty-two people have been killed in five other shootings since last March: At a weekend Juneteenth celebration in Charlotte, a July 4 block party in Chicago and at a convenience store in Springfield, Mo., among others.
On average, there was one mass shooting every 73 days in 2020, compared with one every 36 days in 2019 and one every 45 days in 2017 and 2018. The slowdown interrupted what had been a five-year trend of more frequent and more deadly mass shootings.
That gun violence increased overall even as mass shootings declined underscores the fact that those high-profile events account for a relatively small share of firearm deaths. It should draw more attention to the victims and survivors of gun violence across the country, Barden said.
“They will bear the trauma and the scars of that catastrophe for the rest of their lives,” he said. “The collateral damage is unquantifiable, and it’s reaching almost everyone.”


A Partial List of Mass Shootings in the United States in 2021
The shootings never stopped during the coronavirus pandemic, they just became less public, researchers say.
May 17, 2022
To some, it might have seemed as if mass shootings all but halted during the coronavirus pandemic, with a year passing between large-scale shootings in public places.
But the shootings never stopped. They just weren’t as public.
The Gun Violence Archive, which defines a mass shooting as one with four or more people injured or killed, not including the perpetrator, counted more than 600 such shootings in 2020, compared with 417 in 2019.
That carnage has continued into 2021, with hundreds of shootings so far this year. The archive, a nonprofit organization, has counted 25 mass murders, which it defines as four or more people killed, in 2021 as of mid-November.
There is little consensus on the definition of a mass shooting, complicating the efforts of nonprofits and news organizations to document the scope of the problem.
The Violence Project follows the narrow definition of the Congressional Research Service, requiring the attacks to be in public and excluding domestic shootings and those “attributable to underlying criminal activity.” CNN has defined a mass shooting as one with four or more injuries or deaths. The Washington Post’s effort to track public mass shootings includes shootings with four or more people killed, but does not include robberies or domestic shootings in private homes.
Whatever the definition, it is a persistent American problem. Some mass shootings remain unforgettable to the broader public because of the number of people killed, the attackers’ motivations, the apparent randomness or other factors — cases that often become known by a single place name like Columbine, Newtown or Parkland. But there have been many other mass killings that never receive the same level of attention.
Here is an incomplete list of shootings with multiple victims in 2021. It leaves out many more, but offers a small glimpse of the gun violence the country has already suffered this year.
Nov. 30: Clayton County, Ga., and Oakland County, Mich.
Four people were killed after a gunman opened fire at Oxford High School in suburban Detroit, Mich., in what became the deadliest shooting on school property in the United States this year.
Hours later, a police officer and two women were shot and killed during a domestic violence episode in the metropolitan Atlanta area, the police said. The shooter was also killed.
Nov. 28: Lancaster, Calif.
A 29-year-old father was accused of fatally shooting his four children — ages 1, 2, 7 and 11 — and his mother-in-law inside the family’s home. He was arrested and charged with five counts of murder and three counts of assault on a child causing death.
Nov. 14: Tucson, Ariz.
Four people — two sets of brothers, related as cousins — were killed when a party ended in gunshots. No one has been charged in the deaths.
Oct. 20: Farwell, Mich.
The police said a woman fatally shot her father, sister and two others inside of a home. The woman’s car contained a journal that included a list of other people she intended to kill, the police said.
Sept. 25: Athens, Tenn.
A man and a woman were charged with killing four people inside of a home. The police said there had been a dispute about parenting a 10-month-old child.
Sept. 12: St. Paul, Minn.
Four people were found dead in an abandoned car in a Dunn County, Wis., cornfield after being shot in St. Paul, Minn., the police said. They did not say how they knew the victims were shot in the city.
Sept. 5: Houston, Tex.
A man shot four people, including a 10-year-old and a 12-year-old, before fatally shooting himself days later. The other victims were the gunman’s mother and stepfather.
Sept. 5: Lakeland, Fla.
A former Marine sharpshooter fatally shot four people, including an infant, in two homes and fired at officers before he was arrested. Investigators did not know what started the rampage.
July 25: Wasco, Calif.
A 41-year-old man armed with an assault rifle and a handgun killed four people, including a police officer, after taking hostages inside a home. The gunman was fatally shot by a police officer.
July 20: Jacksonville, Tex.
Three men were arrested in the fatal shootings of four people in the town about 125 miles southeast of Dallas. The police said they believed it was planned as a robbery, and that one of the men who were arrested had a relationship with one of the victims.
June 15: Chicago
Two gunmen broke into a home in the Englewood neighborhood in the South Side of Chicago and shot eight people, killing five of them. Seven of the people were shot in the head, the police said.
May 26: San Jose, Calif.
People gather near a railyard in San Jose, Calif., after eight people were killed.
People gather near a railyard in San Jose, Calif., after eight people were killed.Noah Berger/Associated Press
Nine people were killed in a shooting at a rail yard in San Jose, Calif., the Santa Clara County Sheriff’s Office said. The gunman, a transit worker, was also dead, said the authorities.
May 9: Colorado Springs
Outside the scene of the shooting in Colorado Springs.
Outside the scene of the shooting in Colorado Springs.Jerilee Bennett/The Gazette, via Associated Press
A man killed six people before fatally shooting himself at a birthday party at a mobile home park. Friends, family and children were gathered inside when the shooting occurred. The gunman was “a boyfriend of one of the female victims,” the police said.
Two deputies were killed and three other people, including the gunman, were found dead after a 13-hour standoff in Boone, N.C., on April 28.
Two deputies were killed and three other people, including the gunman, were found dead after a 13-hour standoff in Boone, N.C., on April 28.WSOC-TV
A 32-year-old man killed his mother, stepfather and two police officers before fatally shooting himself at the end of a 13-hour standoff. Another officer was struck by gunfire but avoided injury because the bullet hit his Kevlar helmet.
April 15: Indianapolis
Public safety officials at the crime scene on Friday after a shooting at a FedEx facility in Indianapolis.
Public safety officials at the crime scene on Friday after a shooting at a FedEx facility in Indianapolis.A J Mast for The New York Times
At least eight people were killed, not including a gunman who was believed to have taken his own life after opening fire in a FedEx warehouse. Family members said that workers were unable to use their cellphones on the job, leaving them unable to confirm their safety for hours.
April 7: Rock Hill, S.C.
A memorial service and prayer vigil for the Lesslie family at Fountain Park in Rock Hill, S.C.
A memorial service and prayer vigil for the Lesslie family at Fountain Park in Rock Hill, S.C.Sean Rayford/Associated Press
A former N.F.L. player shot and killed a doctor, the doctor’s wife and their two grandchildren inside their house, as well as two air-conditioning technicians who were working outside the home. The gunman later killed himself, the authorities said.
Police officers standing at the scene in Allen, Texas, where six people were found fatally shot in the suburban Dallas home this month.
Police officers standing at the scene in Allen, Texas, where six people were found fatally shot in the suburban Dallas home this month.Jason Janik/The Dallas Morning News, via Associated Press
The authorities said two brothers killed four family members before killing themselves. The bodies were discovered after the police arrived to a home for a welfare check.
March 31: Orange, Calif.
Police officers on the scene at a shooting in Orange, Calif., in March.
Police officers on the scene at a shooting in Orange, Calif., in March.Allison Zaucha for The New York Times
A gunman opened fire at a real estate office, killing four people, including a 9-year-old boy. The shooting was most likely related to a “business and personal relationship which existed between the suspect and all of the victims,” the authorities said.
March 28: Essex, Md.
Two people at convenience store were among those killed by a gunman in in Essex, Md.
Two people at convenience store were among those killed by a gunman in in Essex, Md.Amy Davis/The Baltimore Sun, via Associated Press
A gunman killed his parents, two people at a convenience store and then himself in a shooting spree, the police said.
March 22: Boulder, Colo.
The emergency response to the shooting in Boulder, Colo., in March.
The emergency response to the shooting in Boulder, Colo., in March.Theo Stroomer for The New York Times
A gunman inside a grocery store killed 10 people, including the first police officer to arrive at the scene. The gunman was injured and taken into custody.
Jami Webb, the daughter of Xiaojie Tan, a victim in the Atlanta area shooting, outside the site of a spa.
Jami Webb, the daughter of Xiaojie Tan, a victim in the Atlanta area shooting, outside the site of a spa.Chang W. Lee/The New York Times
Eight people, including six women of Asian descent, were killed at three spas, at least two of which had been frequented by the gunman. The attack caused particular alarm among many Asian-Americans.
March 13: Indianapolis
A shooting near the city’s east side left four people dead, including a 7-year-old child, and critically wounded a woman, the authorities said. The police said the shooting stemmed from a domestic problem.
Feb. 2: Muskogee, Okla.
The home in Muskogee, Okla., where six people were fatally shot in February.
The home in Muskogee, Okla., where six people were fatally shot in February.Tulsa World Mike Simons/Tulsa World, via Associated Press
Five children and a man were killed and a woman was seriously injured when they were shot at a home. A brother of one of the victims was arrested at the scene. The police said they believed that the victims were related.
Jan. 24: Indianapolis
Five people, including a pregnant woman, were found dead inside a home after the authorities came in contact with a juvenile male, who was suffering from gunshot wounds. A day after the shooting, he was arrested.
Jan. 9: Evanston, Ill.
The police investigating the scene of a shooting on the Chicago-Evanston border in January.
The police investigating the scene of a shooting on the Chicago-Evanston border in January.Chris Sweda/Chicago Tribune, via Associated Press
At least five people, including a 15-year-old girl, were killed in a shooting spree in the Chicago area, the police said. The gunman shot a total of seven people before he was killed by the police.

A Partial List of Mass Shootings in the United States in 2022
There is no official consensus on what constitutes a mass shooting, complicating the efforts of government, nonprofits and news organizations to document the scope of the problem. 
The deadliest mass shooting in the United States in 2022 was the massacre in which 19 children and two teachers were killed at an elementary school in Uvalde, Texas, on May 24. It happened 10 days after 10 people were shot and killed in a supermarket in Buffalo.
There is no consensus on what constitutes a mass shooting, complicating the efforts of government, nonprofits and news organizations to document the scope of the problem. Different groups define mass shootings differently, depending on circumstances including the number of victims, whether the victims are killed or wounded, and whether the shooting occurs in a public place. The Gun Violence Archive, a nonprofit research group that tracks gun violence using police reports, news coverage and other public sources, defines a mass shooting as one in which at least four people were killed or injured.
The Gun Violence Archive counted 648 mass shootings in 2022. Of those shootings, 21 involved five or more fatalities, including the attack at a Walmart in Chesapeake, Va., on Nov. 22 and the shooting at an L.G.B.T.Q. nightclub in Colorado Springs on Nov. 19 that left five people dead.
The group recorded 692 mass shootings in 2021, with 28 involving four or more fatalities.
Here is a partial list of the mass shootings in 2022.
Nov. 22: Chesapeake, Va.
A Walmart employee opened fire in a break room as the store was preparing to close for the night, killing six people, the authorities said. The gunman was found dead, apparently from a self-inflicted gunshot wound, according to the police.
Nov. 20: Colorado Springs
Five people were killed and 17 injured by gunfire in a shooting at an L.G.B.T.Q. nightclub. The gunman was injured and taken to a hospital.
Nov. 13: Charlottesville, Va.
Three University of Virginia students, all of whom were players on the football team, were killed and two were wounded when a gunman, a former football player, opened fire in a garage after a field trip to see a play in Washington.
Oct. 13: Raleigh, N.C.
A gunman, described by the authorities only as a “white male juvenile,” killed five people, including an off-duty police officer, and wounded two others. The attacks drew a large response from law enforcement agencies to the residential area near the Neuse River Greenway, a popular bike trail for Raleigh residents.
Sept. 7: Memphis, Tenn.
Memphis was effectively closed down during an hourslong manhunt for a 19-year-old gunman who killed four people while streaming some of the violence on Facebook Live. There were several shootings and carjackings over the course of the day.
July 17: Greenwood, Ind.
A 20-year-old gunman opened fire in the food court of a mall, killing three people and wounding two others. Minutes into the attack, the gunman, identified as Jonathan Douglas Sapirman, was fatally shot by a bystander.
July 4: Highland Park, Ill.
Robert E. Crimo III, 21, was taken into custody several hours after the shooting in Highland Park, a suburb north of Chicago, and charged with seven counts of first-degree murder. Seven people were killed and dozens more, ranging in age between 8 and 85, were wounded.
The police said the gunman had climbed onto a rooftop with a rifle and begun firing into a crowd gathered for a Fourth of July parade.
June 30: Newark
Nine people were shot and wounded in what the police said appeared to be an incident related to a stolen car. The youngest victim was 17 and the oldest was 68. All were treated at local hospitals.
June 20: Harlem
A 21-year-old college basketball player was killed and eight people were wounded in an early-morning shooting at a popular picnicking area.
After surging during the pandemic, the rate of shootings in New York has begun to fall, although it is still above prepandemic levels.
June 4: Philadelphia
Three people were killed and 12 injured in a shooting in downtown Philadelphia, the police said. An officer fired at one of the gunmen, the police said, but it was unclear whether the gunman had been hit.
Another six people were killed and dozens were injured in several other shootings over the same weekend, including in Arizona, South Carolina, Tennessee and Virginia.
June 1: Tulsa, Okla.
Several people were shot and five were killed at a medical building next to Saint Francis Hospital in Tulsa, Okla., the Tulsa police said. The police said the gunman was believed to have killed himself.
May 24: Uvalde, Texas
Law enforcement officers fatally shot the gunman, identified as Salvador Ramos, 18, but not until well over an hour after he walked into the school, raising questions about whether lives could have been saved if they had acted sooner.
May 15: Laguna Woods, Calif.
A gunman killed one person and critically wounded four other members of the Irvine Taiwanese Presbyterian Church in Laguna Woods, Calif. The congregation, which holds services at the Geneva Presbyterian Church, overpowered the gunman and hogtied him, preventing further bloodshed, the authorities said.
The suspect, David Chou, 68, is a Las Vegas man with a wife and child in Taiwan who had traveled to Orange County with a grievance against Taiwanese people, the authorities said. He was charged with murder and five counts of attempted murder in what the Orange County sheriff, Don Barnes, called a “politically motivated hate incident.”
May 14: Buffalo
A gunman armed with an assault-style weapon killed 10 people and wounded three others at a Tops supermarket in a predominantly Black section of Buffalo, the authorities said.
The suspect, Payton S. Gendron, 18, is white, and the 10 people who died were all Black. Before the attack, Mr. Gendron had posted a nearly 200-page racist screed online. He was indicted on 25 counts, including 10 counts of first-degree murder and 10 counts of second-degree murder charges as hate crimes, as well as a single count of domestic terrorism motivated by hate.
May 13: Milwaukee
At least 16 people were wounded by gunfire in a shooting in downtown Milwaukee, in a popular nightlife area blocks from the arena where an N.B.A. playoff game ended hours earlier, the authorities said.
April 12: Brooklyn
A gunman opened fire inside a crowded subway car during the morning rush, wounding 10 people, the worst attack on New York City’s subway system in decades. More than a dozen other people were also injured, with some choking on smoke from the two devices the police said the gunman detonated before he started shooting. No one was killed.
A suspect, Frank R. James, was arrested the next day and charged with carrying out a terrorist attack on a mass transit system. If convicted, he could face life in prison.
April 3: Sacramento
As revelers spilled out of nightclubs in a two-square-block area of downtown Sacramento, a barrage of gunfire killed six people and wounded 12, the authorities said. Days later, the Sacramento Police Department said “gang violence” was at the center of the shooting, which involved at least five gunmen.
March 19: Dumas, Ark.
Two people engaged in a gunfight and sprayed a crowd with gunfire, killing one bystander and injuring 27 other people, including six children, at a community event and car show in the small Arkansas farming community.
Jan. 23: Milwaukee
Law enforcement officers were called to a Milwaukee home for a welfare check, and found six people who had been fatally shot. The victims — five men and one woman — had been shot, the police said, and evidence early in the investigation suggested that the killings had been targeted.

Mass Shootings in America
Since 2009, there have been 290 mass shootings in the United States, resulting in 1626 people shot and killed and 1075 people shot and wounded.
Dot size indicates the relative number of people shot in each mass shooting.
All Mass Shootings
2009 – 2022
Data is up to date as of: Dec 9, 2022
Twelve Years of Mass Shootings in the United States
An Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund Analysis
Last updated: June 4, 2021
Introduction
In the years between 2009 and 2020, the horrific scenes of mass shootings have haunted the nation’s collective conscience. Each breaking news alert floods the nation with grief and anger at this senseless, preventable violence. The United States is not the only country with mental illness, domestic violence, or hate-fueled ideologies, but our gun homicide rate is 26 times higher than other high-income countries.1 The difference is easy access to guns. This connection is not just theoretical. US states with weaker gun laws and higher gun ownership rates have higher rates of mass shootings.2
While the popular perception may be that mass shootings are the nation’s largest share of gun deaths, the data tells a different and more complex story. In reality, mass shootings are the tip of the iceberg of this country’s gun violence crisis. More than 99 percent of gun deaths in the US are from shootings other than mass shootings.3 Nevertheless, because of the high number of casualties and often extensive and horrific media coverage associated with them, each mass shooting sends shockwaves of pain and harm through families, communities, and the nation. Just like the daily gun violence that contributes to the more than 110 gun deaths each day in the US, mass shootings are largely preventable through evidence-based policy interventions.
947
Shot and wounded
1,363
Shot and killed
10
Shot per mass shooting
This analysis reflects a compilation of 12 years (2009 to 2020) of original data on mass shootings in the United States, sourced from media reports and official police and court records. These records enable unique insights into the circumstances of mass shootings. For full details on data collection, see our methodology.
Mass shootings are not a random, inevitable element of American life today. Rather, this report illuminates trends that can help point lawmakers to strategies to curb these tragedies. These trends include that mass shootings are often:
perpetrated by someone who was legally prohibited from possessing a firearm;
perpetrated by someone who displayed prior warning signs;
intermingled with acts of domestic violence; and
far deadlier when they involve assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.
Definition of a mass shooting
Everytown defines a mass shooting as any incident in which four or more people are shot and killed, excluding the shooter.
By this definition, the United States experiences an average of 19 mass shootings every year, ranging from 15 in 2010 and in 2014 to a high of 24 in both 2011 and 2013. However, there exists no consensus on the definition of a mass shooting. Counts under other definitions range from a dozen per year to nearly one mass shooting every day depending on factors such as casualty thresholds or whether the mass shooting was in public or not.
By any count, the number of mass shootings that plague this country is far too high, and the counts are just a small fraction of the lives left forever changed after the tragedy of a mass shooting. To read more on Everytown’s definition, see our methodology.
Twelve-Year Overview
1 in 4
1 in 4 mass shooting victims were children and teens.
Between 2009 and 2020, 1,363 people in the United States were killed and 947 more were wounded in 240 mass shootings, an average of 20 shootings each year. Among the casualties were at least 362 children and teens killed as well as 21 law enforcement officers killed and 35 wounded. These numbers are staggering, yet they represent just a small portion of the lives forever changed after a mass shooting shakes a community with terror and grief.
In nearly all mass shootings over this period, the shooter was an adult man who acted alone.4 Thirty-two percent of mass shooters, or 92 shooters, ended with the perpetrator dying by suicide, and another 24 shooters were killed by responding law enforcement.5 The remaining 145 mass shooters were taken into custody by law enforcement, while the outcomes and identities of 23 remain unknown.
Most mass shootings happened in private homes
The archetypal mass shooting occurs in a public place like a school or a bar. While mass shootings in public places tend to receive more media attention, the majority of these shootings actually occur in private homes.
Between 2009 and 2020, 61 percent of mass shootings occurred entirely in the home and another 9 percent occurred partially in a home and partially in a public location. Thirty percent occurred entirely in public spaces like schools, malls, or bars. Of these public mass shootings, the majority (59 percent) occurred at least partially in a place of business such as a restaurant or retail store, and 11 percent occurred in a school.6 These public mass shootings were deadlier: While 39 percent of mass shootings occurred at least in part in public, they resulted in 51 percent of all mass-shooting deaths over this 12-year period.
Home(s) only (61%)
Home(s) and public (9%)
Public (30%)
Many mass shooters were prohibited from possessing firearms.
In the absence of a comprehensive federal law that requires background checks on all gun sales across the country, criminals, domestic abusers, and other prohibited people can easily avoid background checks in 29 states simply by buying guns from unlicensed sellers—including strangers they meet online.
Dot size indicates the relative number of people shot in each mass shooting.
1 in 3
1 in 3 mass shootings involved a shooter that was legally prohibited from possessing firearms at the time of the shooting.
The harm posed when people who should not have guns can easily avoid a background check is particularly evident in mass shootings, where one in three incidents involved shooters that were legally prohibited from possessing firearms at the time of the shooting, whether because they had a felony conviction, had been adjudicated mentally ill by a court of law, or had a domestic violence restraining order, among other reasons.7 These shootings resulted in 364 deaths and 125 injuries, or one in four deaths and one in 10 injuries, that may have been prevented with a stronger, more comprehensive background check system.8
Closing loopholes in our federal and state background check laws can prevent guns from ending up in the hands of those who are legally prohibited from having a firearm. Read more about how background checks save lives and protect communities.
Mass shooters often displayed warning signs
Perpetrators of mass shootings often display warning signs before the violence, such as engaging in recent acts or threats of violence or violating a protection order. These warning signs present opportunities for intervention that could save lives. In fact, in more than half (56 percent) of the mass shootings in this analysis, a shooter exhibited at least one dangerous warning sign prior to the shooting. Combined, shooters demonstrating dangerous warning signs took 596 lives and wounded 260 more, equating to more than half of mass shooting deaths and a third of all injuries.9
Dot size indicates the relative number of people shot in each mass shooting.
56%
In 56 percent of mass shootings, the shooter exhibited dangerous warning signs before the shooting.
The fact that so many mass shooters displayed warning signs prior to their acts of violence highlights the opportunities to intervene and prevent these tragedies. Extreme Risk laws are one such opportunity. Sometimes referred to as “red flag” laws, these laws empower loved ones and law enforcement who recognize warning signs to petition a court to temporarily restrict a person’s access to firearms when they pose a significant risk of using them to cause harm. Research shows Extreme Risk laws are effective in saving lives, especially in cases of firearm suicide. Read more about the research here.
Domestic violence was a part of most mass shootings
Although many people think of mass shootings as random acts of violence, this analysis shows that most mass shootings are not at all random: In at least 53 percent of mass shootings between 2009 and 2020, the perpetrator shot a current or former intimate partner or family member during the rampage. These domestic violence-related mass shootings resulted in at least 632 people shot and killed and 106 people wounded, amounting to almost half of all mass shooting deaths and one in ten injuries.
Dot size indicates the relative number of people shot in each mass shooting.
Nearly 3 in 4 children and teens killed in mass shootings died in an incident connected to domestic violence.
53%
53 percent of mass shootings were domestic violence-related.
Too often, children and teens are the victims of domestic violence mass shootings: Of the 362 children and teens killed in all mass shootings in the past 12 years, nearly three in four (72 percent) died in an incident connected to intimate partner or family violence.
The findings about domestic violence-related mass shootings and where mass shootings tend to occur are interlinked. Nearly all of these domestic violence-related shootings involved at least one victim in a private home (93 percent), and 80 percent of them occurred there entirely and never moved into a public space.10
79% of domestic violence-related shootings occurred entirely in the home
Home(s) only (80%)
Home(s) and public (13%)
Public (7%)
Everytown for Gun Safety. “Mass Shootings in America 2009-2020”. Everytown for Gun Safety. (2021). https://bit.ly/3fQBlc2
In at least 71 mass shootings, the shooter had a known previous history of domestic violence. In 56 of those mass shootings, the shooter shot and killed an intimate partner or family member as part of their rampage.
Intimate partner and family violence are far more likely to turn deadly when guns are involved. Abusers with firearms are five times more likely to kill their female victims, and guns further exacerbate the power and control dynamic used by abusers to inflict emotional abuse and exert coercive control over their victims.11 Read more about the deadly nexus between domestic violence and guns and the policies that help prevent domestic homicides here.
Mass shootings involving assault weapons or high-capacity magazines were far deadlier.
When assault weapons and high-capacity magazines were used in mass shootings, they resulted in far more deaths and injuries. Between 2009 and 2020, the five deadliest mass shooting incidents in the US all involved the use of assault weapons and/or high-capacity magazines: Las Vegas, Orlando, Newtown, Sutherland Springs, and El Paso. 12
Assault weapons and high-capacity magazines were disproportionately used in public mass shootings. Of the shootings with known weapon type, 76 percent of those that involved an assault weapon and/or high-capacity magazine occurred in public compared to 44 percent of those that involved a handgun.13
81%
81 percent of mass shootings involved a handgun.
16%
16 percent of mass shootings involved an assault weapon.
55%
55 percent of mass shootings involved a high-capacity magazine.
Handguns
Most mass shootings—81 percent—involved the use of at least one handgun, and 60 percent involved only handguns.14 At least 17 shooters used only a handgun with a high-capacity magazine.
Assault weapons
Assault weapons are generally high-powered, semiautomatic firearms designed to fire rounds at a greater velocity than most other firearms, and, when combined with high-capacity magazines, they enable a shooter to fire a devastating number of rounds over a short period. In the 12 years from 2009 to 2020, there were at least 30 mass shootings (16 percent of those with known weapon data) that involved the use of an assault weapon, resulting in 347 deaths and 719 injuries. In other words, mass shootings that involved an assault weapon accounted for 25 percent of all mass shootings deaths and 76 percent of injuries. While not used in the majority of mass shootings, when they were, it left six times as many people shot per incident than when there was no assault weapon.15
Assault weapons led to 6x as many people shot per mass shooting
Last updated: 3.18.2022
High-capacity magazines
High-capacity magazines allow a shooter to fire more rounds without pausing to reload. The more rounds a shooter can fire consecutively, the more gunshot wounds they can inflict during an attack.16 While nearly every assault weapon used in a mass shooting over this period included a high-capacity magazine, an additional 20 mass shootings involved the use of high-capacity magazines with other guns. In total, at least 42 mass shootings involved high-capacity magazines, which resulted in 422 people killed and 710 people wounded. Of those 42 mass shootings that involved high-capacity magazines, three-fourths occurred in public places.17 As a whole, the mass shootings we know involved the use of high-capacity magazines resulted in nearly five times as many people shot on average as those that did not.18
High-capacity magazines led to 5x as many people shot per mass shooting
Last updated: 3.18.2022
Assault Weapons or High-Capacity Magazines
2009 – 2019
Dot size indicates the relative number of people shot in each mass shooting.
A growing body of research shows that states can reduce gun violence by limiting access to assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. States with restrictions on magazine size experience mass shootings at less than half the rate of states without restrictions.19 Another study estimated that mass shooting deaths were 70 percent less likely to occur when the federal prohibition on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines was in effect.20 In fact, when looking at possible factors such as socio-demographics and gun laws, laws restricting magazine size were by far the strongest predictor of a state’s rate of mass shootings.21 Read more about assault weapons and high-capacity magazines and the policies that help prevent their use in gun violence here.
Between 2009 and 2020, the 5 deadliest mass shootings all involved assault weapons and/or high-capacity magazines.
Mass shootings cause indelible harm to survivors and communities
Every bed was full. We had people in the hallways, people outside, and more people coming in.
Dr. Jay Coates, a trauma surgeon in Las Vegas22none
The destructive reach of a mass shooting stretches far beyond those killed and wounded, damaging the well-being of survivors, their families, and communities. Studies of survivors from various mass shootings consistently find that mass shootings harm the mental health of both direct survivors and community members, including psychological symptoms like post-traumatic stress and depression.23 Even those living far away, such as those watching coverage of a mass shooting on the news, can experience increased fear of crime or victimization and uncertainty about their safety at school and in the community.24
Mass shooting response also burdens health care systems, local economies, and taxpayers. One researcher estimated that the cost of the Las Vegas mass shooting would be at least $600 million after tallying costs such as medical and mental health care, police work, work loss and employer expenses, and quality of life.25 The fear of mass shootings only increases these costs—one investigation found that since Columbine, at least $811 million federal dollars have been spent to help school districts hire security guards.26
“While I have no physical scars, I have had increased anxiety and hypervigilance in my daily life since that day. Outdoor events are difficult for me, and I constantly think of an escape plan, wherever I am. We need change, so no one has to be afraid of ‘fireworks’ ever again.”
Geena Marano, a survivor of the Las Vegas mass shooting.27none
Conclusion
Only through understanding the true nature of mass shootings can we begin to seek evidence-based solutions. Lawmakers should pass legislation requiring background checks on all firearm sales, temporarily removing firearms through Extreme Risk laws, keeping firearms out of the hands of domestic abusers, and restricting the purchase, possession, and manufacture of assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.

Mass Shootings In The United States: Population Health Impacts And Policy Levers
The harmful effects of mass shootings on survivors’ and communities’ health are well-documented. There is an urgent need for additional research to understand which prevention and mitigation strategies are the most effective. The United States is experiencing a gun violence epidemic, and mass shootings are one of its most tragic manifestations. During the past four decades, mass shootings have caused at least 1,000 deaths and another 1,500 injuries in the United States. Although mass shootings account for less than 1 percent of all firearm deaths annually in the country, they evoke significant public interest and have detrimental effects that extend far beyond the harm to the direct victims and their families.
This health policy brief reviews research about mass shootings and their effects on population health. We also discuss policy interventions that may reduce the population health harms inflicted by mass shootings and outline areas for future research. We focus on mass shootings, not the broader phenomenon of gun violence, which is another critical yet distinct issue.
What Are Mass Shootings, And How Prevalent Are They?
In the 1980s the Federal Bureau of Investigation adopted the definition of a “mass murderer” as a person who kills four or more people, excluding themselves, in a single incident, and typically in a single location. After the 2012 Sandy Hook school shooting, Congress defined the related term “mass killing” to mean three or more killings during a single incident, excluding the perpetrator, without referring to a weapon. With the lack of a firm definition of a mass shooting, researchers rely on different organizations’ definitions and databases to analyze and track mass shootings. The criteria used to create these databases vary by several dimensions, including the minimum victim count, where the incident occurred, whether the shooting was related to a conventional crime (gang violence, robbery, and so on), and whether the perpetrator and the victims were related. These inconsistencies lead to different assessments of the prevalence and lethality of mass shootings.
Despite these differences, most data sets show an increase in the number and lethality of mass shootings between 2000 and 2019 (exhibits 1 and 2). Moreover, there has been greater public awareness of these tragic events in recent years as a result of media coverage. According to a 2019 poll, nearly half of Americans live with the fear of becoming a victim of a mass shooting.
Population Health Impacts Of Mass Shootings
Researchers face several hurdles in identifying the health effects of mass shootings. First, these events are unpredictable and rare, relative to the broader epidemic of firearm violence. Accordingly, sample sizes are usually small, and the results may be biased if those who come forward to speak to researchers are less or more heavily affected by the shooting. Studies relying on interviews with survivors naturally lack preshooting data on survivors and often do not use a control group of comparable people who did not experience or witness a mass shooting.
We provide a synopsis of the emerging body of literature that uses quasi-experimental research designs to study the effects of mass shootings on population health. These studies overcome some of the challenges described above by using a comparison group and regression analysis to control for multiple variables. The key results of ten such studies are summarized in supplemental exhibit 1. In most of these studies, “exposure” to a mass shooting does not mean being physically present when the shots were fired but, rather, living in the community or attending the school where the shooting occurred.
One set of studies focusing on school shootings (which represent about 14 percent of US mass shootings during the past four decades) finds that exposure to shootings increases the likelihood of youth antidepressant use and suicide risk. School shooting survivors experience declines in health and engage in more risky behaviors, even as adults.
Another set of studies looks at mass shootings more broadly and finds that shootings adversely affect entire communities. For example, adults living in counties with mass shootings experience reductions in community well-being and mental and emotional health, even if they did not directly witness the shooting. A study of a shooting in Norway found that even the parents and siblings of survivors experience substantial increases in doctor visits and mental health diagnoses, highlighting the pervasive spillover effects of mass shootings despite solid safety nets and universal access to health care.
There is also research to show that women who had a mass shooting in their county during pregnancy were more likely to give birth to very premature and low birthweight babies. In addition, after a shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Florida, sexual minority men nationwide experienced increases in severe psychological distress compared with heterosexual men. This suggests that when shooters target specific demographic groups, people who identify with that group suffer even if they did not witness or live near the shooting.
In addition to these quasi-experimental studies, a voluminous literature in medicine, psychology, and sociology examines health outcomes among mass shooting survivors. These studies suffer from limitations such as small sample sizes, lack of control groups, and selective response bias, but provide overwhelming evidence of a negative association between exposure to mass shootings and subsequent well-being. A review of this literature can be found in articles by James Shultz and colleagues and by Sarah Lowe and Sandro Galea.
Policy Responses To Mass Shootings
This section discusses policies designed to prevent mass shootings and to mitigate their impacts on victims and the general public. Evidence of the effectiveness of these strategies is presented when available, but to date, there is little credible evidence on the causal effects of policies on the frequency and lethality of mass shootings. Accordingly, there is an urgent need for research on the efficacy of these strategies, as discussed further in the last section of this brief.
Prevention Strategies
Strategies to prevent mass shootings can be categorized into physical security measures, social media monitoring, mental health supports, and gun control policies.
Physical Security Measures:
The most immediate response to mass shootings is usually improving the security of physical structures to prevent armed intrusion. This includes implementation of access control systems, video surveillance, metal detectors, room and building locks, identification tags for building personnel, and buildingwide notification systems. Public event organizers are also broadening their security strategies from simple perimeter fences to comprehensive approaches, including full-perimeter fencing, metal detectors, and bag searches at entrances. In addition, many states mandate physical security measures for schools.
As of 2019, twenty-eight states enacted laws requiring schools to secure their buildings against unauthorized access and forty-one states authorized the presence of law enforcement officers in schools. However, there are also barriers to adopting these approaches based on potential violation of students’ privacy, concerns about making schools appear unwelcoming to students, and the risk of racial profiling.
Social Media Monitoring:
Mass shooters sometimes signal their intentions on social media, and school districts and universities are increasingly using social media monitoring to stop the next school shooting. However, there is little empirical evidence of the efficacy of this strategy in predicting potential mass shootings, and some experts are skeptical. Although social media monitoring is a low-cost intervention compared with other surveillance methods, it may be challenging to understand the context of such communications. Moreover, the content in social media is often inaccurate or misleading as a result of fake and shared accounts. Potential discrimination and racial profiling are also concerns.
Mental Health Supports:
Research indicates that a mental illness diagnosis alone has little relation to the risk for violence. The relationship between serious mental illness and violence is weaker than either the public imagines or the media reports. However, although the vast majority of people with a mental illness do not exhibit violent behavior, there are well-established, scientifically validated treatment programs for the small proportion of these people who may be predisposed to violence as a result of mental health problems.
US federal law prohibits the possession or purchase of firearms by people who have been involuntarily committed to a mental health institution or adjudicated as mentally ill by a lawful authority. However, states use different definitions of mental illness; for example, some states with stricter definitions also prohibit gun access for those voluntarily admitted into psychiatric hospitals. Moreover, states differ in the way they apply the law to different types of “firearms.” For example, in some states, the prohibition applies to all firearms and ammunition, whereas the restriction in other states refers only to specific types of weapons, such as pistols or concealed weapons.
Many states and school systems have adopted policies that link mental health support to violence prevention. A recent study conducted a systematic review of local, state, and national commissions that convened after school shootings to identify mental health recommendations to reduce shootings. Several recommendations emerged, including expanding access to counseling, expanding involuntary treatment, and implementing bullying prevention programs. At this time, there has been little empirical investigation of whether these actions are effective in preventing mass shootings.
There is also increased awareness and recognition that an approach focusing primarily on mental illness diagnosis may not stop these tragedies and, instead, could cause prejudice and fear among people living with a mental illness and may deter them from seeking care.
Gun Control Policies:
About 80 percent of the weapons used in mass shootings during the past four decades were obtained legally. Mass shootings thus increase the salience of the gun control debate. At the federal level, there are few restrictions on gun ownership. Notably, the federal Gun Control Act of 1968 prevents people with specific criminal backgrounds and mental health diagnoses from acquiring firearms. In addition, in 2022 the Senate passed bipartisan gun safety legislation that is widely considered to be the most significant government response to mass shootings in three decades. The bill includes increased funding for mental health programs and school safety and enhanced background checks for gun buyers who are younger than twenty-one, who for the first time will be subject to a search of juvenile criminal and mental health records.
Yet much of the action in gun control policy continues to be at the state level, and policies vary widely by geography. For example, only about half the states require background checks for firearm sales and have child access prevention laws.
One study found that mass shooting incidents increase the number of gun-related bills introduced in state legislatures, but that the nature and passage of those laws depend on the partisan balance of the state legislature. Republican-controlled legislatures tend to enact laws that loosen gun restrictions, and Democrat-controlled legislatures tend to introduce stricter gun control laws, but without a statistically significant effect on enactment. The one exception to this pattern is “red flag” laws, which have spread across the county in response to mass shooting events. Red flag laws allow law enforcement, and sometimes family members, school administrators, and mental health providers, to petition a court to restrict a person’s ability to possess firearms based on the threat of future harm; as of June 2022, nineteen states and Washington, D.C., had implemented red flag laws.
A common thread in mass shootings is the use of assault weapons and large-capacity ammunition magazines, which allow a shooter to keep firing for longer periods of time and at a higher frequency, increasing casualties and reducing victims’ ability to escape or intervene. A study of public mass shootings resulting in four or more deaths found that assault rifles caused more than 85 percent of such fatalities. Seven states and Washington, D.C., have passed laws banning assault weapons, and two regulate them. Nine states and Washington, D.C., have enacted laws prohibiting large-capacity ammunition magazines.
Although mass shootings galvanize public debate on gun control, we know relatively little about the causal impact of gun control laws on the frequency of mass shootings in the United States. There is some evidence that assault weapons bans reduce mass shooting casualties, but little research has been performed on the effects of other gun control policies. This contrasts with the literature documenting a negative association between gun control policies and overall firearm homicides, but not necessarily mass shooting deaths.
Until researchers can better understand what prevention policies will work in the United States, the lessons learned from the experiences of other counties can provide some guidance. For instance, after a horrific shooting in 1996, Australia implemented the National Firearms Agreement, which banned automatic and semiautomatic weapons and included a weapon buyback scheme. There was not a single mass shooting in twenty years after the agreement went into effect. Similarly, after a school shooting in 1996, the United Kingdom banned private ownership of handguns and assault weapons, and there has been only one mass shooting since. However, some studies show that cultural forces and attitudes toward guns can partially explain gun availability, violence, and deaths, so we cannot assume that what works in other countries will work in the United States. Nonetheless, there are likely valuable lessons to be learned from other counties’ experiences, and it is worthwhile to invest in resources that would significantly reduce the incidence and lethality of mass shootings.
Mitigation Strategies
Strategies to mitigate mass shootings can be categorized into preparation and emergency responses and victims’ services.
Preparation And Emergency Responses:
Increasingly, local policy makers are attempting to design multiagency coordinated responses to shootings. For example, the Hartford Consensus, which arose from a collaboration between the American College of Surgeons and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, aims to reduce the death toll of first responders and victims, using techniques supported by both the medical literature and operational experience (for example, how to deliver lifesaving care during shootings).
Law enforcement’s response to mass shootings has also evolved. Until the 1999 shooting at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, the typical police response was securing the perimeter and waiting for the SWAT team to arrive. Since then, a major tactical shift has recognized the need for an immediate and more aggressive response. Increasingly, police are beginning to directly enter facilities to engage with the shooter. As for emergency response personnel, there is also a recognition of the urgency of getting medical care providers to the victims as quickly as possible.
One of the most visible policy changes in the preparedness landscape is the introduction of policies and procedures to be followed during an active shooter incident.  In 2019–20 about 96 percent of schools had a written plan in place for procedures to be performed in the event of an active shooter, up from 79 percent in 2003–04. One survey asked schools whether they had drilled students on the use of selected emergency procedures; in 2019–20 about 98 percent of public schools had drilled students on lockdown procedures, 94 percent on evacuation procedures, and 92 percent on shelter-in-place procedures. However, studies show that active shooter drills have little impact on preventing school shootings or offering the school community protection should a shooting take place.
Victims’ Services:
About 28 percent of people who have witnessed a mass shooting develop posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Thus, counseling services are often made available to both direct victims and community members in the immediate aftermath of a shooting. The American Psychological Association provides resources describing the types of necessary mental health support for victims and communities in the days and years after shootings, and the federal government offers grants to local governments and institutions to implement such programs. In addition to mental health support, some states are considering financial compensation for victims of mass shootings. For example, Virginia is considering establishing a dedicated fund for the victims of mass shootings.
Future Research Directions
An extensive literature has established the harmful effects mass shootings have on survivors’ health. Still, more work should use quasi-experimental methods to assess how these tragedies affect people beyond those directly involved. For example, we know little about the causal effects of mass shootings on smoking, risky drinking, child maltreatment, and the use of counseling and other mental health services among those who did and those who did not witness the shooting. There is also a need for more research on the causal effects of mass shootings on specific mental health conditions, such as insomnia or PTSD, among community members who did not directly witness the shooting. We know even less about the efficacy of gun control regulations and other prevention policies discussed above.
Several factors complicate researchers’ ability to conduct policy-relevant research and policy makers’ ability to design policies based on evidence. First, the lack of an official definition of mass shootings means that different studies may come to different conclusions because of how they define mass shootings.
Second, it is unclear how to identify people who were “exposed” to shootings. Clearly, the impacts of mass shootings extend far beyond the immediate victims and their families. Yet most studies (except for some of the emerging quasi-experimental literature) focus solely on the victims and their families, so current research may underestimate the total societal costs of shootings. Even those quasi-experimental studies comparing outcomes in counties where mass shootings occurred with other counties may underestimate effect sizes if particularly tragic and well-publicized events, such as the 2022 elementary school shooting in Uvalde, Texas, have nationwide impacts and affect people even in distant counties.
Third, mass shootings are relatively rare and unpredictable, making it statistically difficult to detect the effects of potential prevention policies (such as gun control) on their frequency and lethality.
Policy makers should establish an official definition of “mass shooting”; the absence of a firm definition makes it more challenging for researchers to study mass shootings and to establish a baseline for whether various strategies are effective in reducing mass shootings and their harmful consequences. It also makes it harder for policy makers to synthesize findings across studies. An official definition would also be useful in establishing criteria for the availability of federal and local resources to victims or local law enforcement in the aftermath of mass shootings.
Policy makers should also support research on the efficacy of policy responses. We propose applying quasi-experimental methods to identify the effects of state-level policies on the frequency and victim count of mass shootings. In addition, establishing a national gun registry will help researchers understand the extent of gun ownership by geography and how this correlates with mass shooting events.

Mass shootings in the US: 2022 could be the second-highest year
Flowers are piled around crosses remembering those killed at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas.
This year is likely to be the second-highest year for mass shootings in the United States on record, according to data compiled by the Gun Violence Archive, a non-profit that tracks gun violence incidents across the country.
The Gun Violence Archive, like CNN, defines a mass shooting as one in which at least four people are shot, excluding the shooter.
There have been at least 607 mass shootings through November 22 this year. That’s just short of the 638 mass shootings in the country at this point last year – the worst year on record since the group began tracking them in 2014. There were a total of 690 mass shootings in 2021. The United States is likely to soon surpass the total of 610 mass shootings in 2020, with more than a month left of 2022 to go.
Tuesday’s massacre at a Walmart in Chesapeake, Virginia, left six people dead and four more with injuries. That was just three days after five people died in a shooting rampage at an LGBTQ nightclub in Colorado.
In the past week alone, mass shootings have claimed at least 24 lives and injured 37 others in gun rampages across seven states, according to the Gun Violence Archive.
There have been more mass shootings than days so far in 2022 – a trend that’s continued each year since 2019 – underscoring the growing prevalence of gun violence in American life.
The pace of mass shootings in 2022 is part of a three-year uptick that began in 2020. Between 2019 and 2020, the total number of mass shootings all year jumped from 417 to 610. The number jumped again in 2021 to 690.
In 2022 so far, at least 3,179 people have been shot in mass shootings, resulting in 637 deaths and more than 2,500 people injured.
Through the same period in 2021, there were at least 3,267 people shot in mass shootings, resulting in 645 deaths, while in 2020 the numbers show 2,873 people shot with 463 deaths.
So far in November, there have been at least 32 mass shootings across the nation resulting in more than 177 people shot and 43 dead. For the month of November 2021 through the 22nd, there were 36 mass shootings, resulting in 160 people shot, leaving 34 of those people dead.

The key to stopping mass shootings? Treat them like a public health disaster, this scientist says
The key to stopping mass shootings? Treat them like a public health disaster, this scientist says
Science chats with gun violence researcher Garen Wintemute about predicting and preventing gun tragedies
guns on tables
Background checks for all firearm transactions could reduce the risk of violence.AP Photo/Philip Kamrass
Some of the deadliest mass shootings in U.S. history, including lone gunmen killing 26 people at the First Baptist Church in Sutherland Springs, Texas, and 17 students and staff at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, have occurred in the past 2 years.
These tragedies were preventable, says Garen Wintemute, an emergency medicine physician at the University of California (UC), Davis, Medical Center, and the director of UC Davis's Violence Prevention Research Program. Wintemute has studied gun violence for more than 30 years and is one of the few researchers to approach the matter as an issue of public health. He has gone undercover at gun shows to document illegal activity and worked with California lawmakers to establish gun policies.
Wintemute writes about his solutions to gun violence in an opinion piece published this week in The New England Journal of Medicinenone. Science chatted with him about the unique factors behind mass shootings and which policy interventions are most effective. This interview has been edited for clarity and length.
Q: What does it mean to approach gun violence from a public health perspective?
A: Firearm violence has been seen traditionally as a crime problem. But gun violence is one of our leading causes of death and injury, and the implications of this violence are huge in terms of the safety and health of our overall population. So, we treat it as we would any other major health problem. We ask: Where does it come from? How does it get amplified? Who is at risk for developing this problem? Can we learn enough to create a treatment or prevention strategy?
Q: How are mass shootings different from other acts of gun violence?
A: They are rare, accounting for maybe 1% of deaths from firearm violence. But they are also unique. They are the one form of violence about which no one can tell a story that leaves themselves out. It could happen to me. It could happen to my children. It could happen to my grandchildren. What public mass shootings have sadly done is, for the first time in history, made this everyone's problem. The specific role of my article is to point out that there are some very specific things that we can do to help make these events a lot less likely to happen.
headshot of Garen Wintemute
Garen Wintemute
UC Davis Health Illustration Services
Q: The first way you say we can stop mass shootings is through better background checks. How do we improve them?
A: Twenty-two percent of all firearm transfers in the country do not involve a background check. These take place over the internet, at gun shows, or a brokered through "friend of a friend" exchanges. Some states require a background check for all transfers of firearms, but most states do not, and the federal government does not. Comprehensive, well-designed background checks, as well as regular reporting by agencies of incidents that would prohibit someone from purchasing a gun would let us see the full effectiveness of this policy.
Q: Your second recommendation is for gun violence restraining orders. What do these involve?
A: If a person is credibly believed to be at high and imminent risk of doing harm and has access to firearms, these laws allow law enforcement or family members to go to a judge and present the evidence just as they would in any other court proceeding. The judge can then issue an order that authorizes law enforcement to recover firearms from this individual for a defined period of time, typically just 2 or 3 weeks.
These orders, if properly used, would not just prevent individual tragedies but could probably drop rates of violence altogether because it's so common that a future shooter puts out unmistakable signals of intent to do harm. This can mean telling hospital staff, friends, or family that they're planning on hurting themselves or others. It can mean unusual patterns of purchasing weapons, like purchasing several firearms in a short time span. Here in California, I am aware of two mass shootings that did not occur because the intended shooters said things like, "I'm going to shoot up a school," which came to the attention of law enforcement.
Q: Do you ever encounter resistance to your work because of the political debate around gun control?
A: There's always controversy with this sort of work, but to me the common ground far outweighs it. One of the policy proposals that is widely seen as highly controversial is to require a background check for all purchases of firearms. More than 90% of the population supports that measure, but so do more than 80% of gun owners and more than 70% of self-identified members of the National Rifle Association.
A mistake that is often made—it's made by the public, it's made by the media—is to pay attention to the extremes and ignore the fact that the country has basically made up its mind on this one. We just need our leadership to represent the opinions of the people and not the opinions of the extremes.
Q: What are you going to study next?
A: We're conducting a true randomized trial of an intervention here in California that identifies people who legally purchased firearms in the past but have just become prohibited from owning firearms. They've just been convicted of a violent crime, or they've just been served with a domestic violence restraining order, or they've just been hospitalized for a psychiatric emergency related to dangerousness to self or others. The intervention in California identifies those people, then puts law enforcement officers at the front door to recover the firearms. Intuitively, it sounds like a good idea, but no one knows whether that process is effective in reducing rates in violence. We are collaborating with enforcement agencies on a randomized trial that involves almost the entire state. This is the same process used throughout medical research to test how effective a given treatment is—only this time the treatment is a firearm policy.

The US averaged at least 1 deadly mass shooting a month in 2018
The list of deadly shootings continues to grow.
Some of the deadliest mass shootings in the U.S. last year -- including the Parkland high school shooting and the massacre at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh -- prompted widespread national horror.
News of other mass shootings, however, seemed to have only reached local audiences. There were a number of incidents where spouses or former spouses killed their partners, and sometimes their children, in Texas, Delaware, Tennessee, Maryland and California.
The FBI does not have an official definition of a mass shooting. They do, however, define a mass killing as an incident in which three or more people, not including the suspect, are killed. For decades, that definition used four or more deaths as the metric, but that changed in 2013. Various groups and watchdog organizations keep their own lists, often using different criteria for what qualifies as a mass shooting and often sticking with the earlier threshold of four or more deaths.
The FBI defines a mass shooting as an incident in which four or more people, not including the suspect, are killed. While there is no publicly accessible federal tracker of such incidents, various groups and watchdog organizations keep their own lists, often using different criteria for what qualifies as a mass shooting.
For the list compiled by ABC News below, the incidents took place over the course of a day and involved four or more victims, not including the suspect. For instance, shooting sprees that spanned longer amounts of time were not included on this list.
Recent Stories from ABC News
 Top Stories 00:36
All told, there were at least 20 shootings in 2018 that fit these parameters.
PHOTO: Deadly Mass Shootings in 2018
Deadly Mass Shootings in 2018
ABC News
There are hundreds of other deadly shootings that took place across the U.S. this year that don't fit these conditions, including some that received national attention, like the shooting at a Maryland Rite Aid, or the shooting at a Chicago hospital.
In both of those incidents, three victims were killed and the suspects in each shooting also killed themselves.
But whether they made national headlines or not, the common, heartbreaking thread among the 20 incidents below was that they all happened in 2018.
1. Jan. 28: Shooting at a Pennsylvania car wash, 4 victims
PHOTO: Sierra Kolarik, the sister of Chelsie Cline, one of the victims in a mass shooting at Ed's Car Wash, is comforted, Jan. 28, 2018, in Melcroft, Pa.
Sierra Kolarik, the sister of Chelsie Cline, one of the victims in a mass shooting at Ed's Car Wash, is comforted, Jan. 28, 2018, in Melcroft, Pa.
Justin Merriman/Getty Images, FILE
Four people were killed in a shooting outside a self-service car wash in a rural western Pennsylvania town when a man wearing body armor and wielding three guns, including an AR-15 semiautomatic assault rifle, opened fire on them, according to Pennsylvania authorities.
The shooting in Melcroft in Fayette County, about 55 miles southeast of Pittsburgh, occurred at 2:52 a.m. and was described by the local district attorney as a "horrible and senseless event."
2. Jan. 28: Shooting at an apartment in Pennsylvania, 4 victims
The suspect in the shooting of four people at a Reading apartment complex is still at large, authorities said.
"We cannot remember any time in recent history when this many people were shot at one time," James Marasco Jr., the deputy chief of the Reading Police Department told the Associated Press at the time.
Capt. Paul Reilly of the Reading Police Department's investigation division told ABC News that as of Nov. 26, there have been no arrests and it is still an open investigation. They do not believe it was a random shooting, Reilly said.
3. Feb. 10: Domestic shooting spree in Kentucky, 4 victims
The suspect who killed his parents, his girlfriend and her mother allegedly struggled with drug addiction before the shooting, his pastor told The Lexington Herald Leader.
The suspect, identified as 45-year-old Joseph Nickell, killed himself after he killed his parents, James Wayne Nickell, 75, and Arlene Nickell, 70; his girlfriend Lindsey Vanhoose, 41; and her mother Patricia Vanhoose, 57.
The shooter's teenage son was reportedly at his grandparents' home where the first shooting occurred and escaped before calling 911, the paper reported.
4. Feb. 14: Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School shooting, 17 victims
PHOTO: Students are brought out of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School after a shooting at the school on Feb. 14, 2018, in Parkland, Fla. 
Students are brought out of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School after a shooting at the school on Feb. 14, 2018, in Parkland, Fla.
Joe Raedle/Getty Images
The deadliest shooting of the year took place in Parkland, Florida, when a former student opened fire and killed 17 students and school staffers.
The suspect, Nikolas Cruz, fled the scene and was later apprehended by authorities. He has been charged with 17 counts of murder and 17 counts of attempted murder in the school shooting, and is now facing new charges after allegedly attacking a deputy in jail, according to ABC affiliate WPLG.
The massacre prompted survivors to launch a national movement and Florida to change its gun laws. Held a month after the deadly shooting, the March for Our Lives became a national event and some of its student organizers -- including Emma Gonzalez, David Hogg and Jackie Corin -- have become widely recognized figures in the fight for gun reform. The group also launched a national bus tour to try to get other young people involved.
5. Feb. 26: Shootings at gas station and a home in Detroit, 4 victims
A man pulled up to a car at a Detroit gas station and opened fire on his child's mother, Ciera Bargaineer, after an altercation.
The suspect, George Davis Jr., killed Bargaineer, another woman who was in the car with her, 21-year old Kristin Thomas, and Bargaineer's father, 60-year-old Raphael Hall, ABC affiliate WXYZ reported.
Davis then reportedly fled the scene and fatally shot his cousin at a home about two miles away, according to WXYZ.
Davis shot himself after leading police on a chace, the station reported.
6. April 22: Waffle House shooting in Nashville, 4 victims
PHOTO: Family members of people killed at a Waffle House restaurant write messages on wooden crosses set up as a memorial, April 25, 2018, in Nashville, Tenn. 
Family members of people killed at a Waffle House restaurant write messages on wooden crosses set up as a memorial, April 25, 2018, in Nashville, Tenn.
Mark Humphrey/AP Photo
A bystander a deadly massacre at a Waffle House. James Shaw Jr., 29, confronted the gunman, took his gun, threw it over a counter and forced the gunman outside. The suspect, Travis Reinking, who was later apprehended by law enforcement officers and is now facing four counts of criminal homicide.
Four people were killed: Taurean Sanderlin, 29, a cook at the restaurant who was on a cigarette break and was one of the first slain in the shooting; DeEbony Groves, 21, an honor student at Belmont University in Nashville; and Akilah DaSilva, 23, a Middle Tennessee State University student. The youngest victim was 20-year-old Joe Perez, whose mother wrote in a Facebook post, "Me, my husband and sons are broken right now with this loss. Our lives are shattered."
7. May 17: Domestic violence incident in Texas, 4 victims
A woman, identified in her children's subsequent obituary as Amanda Simpson Painter, survived a shooting where she says her ex-husband Justin Painter killed their three children and her then-boyfriend, according to The Dallas Morning News.
The victims were identified as 29-year-old Seth Richardson, and Odin, 8, Caydence, 6, and Drake Painter, 4.
Amanda Simpson Painter told The Huffington Post that Justin Painter told her that he was intentionally letting her alive to live with the pain of losing her children.
8. May 18: Santa Fe High School shooting, 10 victims
PHOTO: Senior Amy Roden and her grandmother Gail embrace at a makeshift memorial for shooting victims outside Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas, May 20, 2018.
Senior Amy Roden and her grandmother Gail embrace at a makeshift memorial for shooting victims outside Santa Fe High School in Santa Fe, Texas, May 20, 2018.
Michael Stravato/The New York Times/Redux Pictures
Gov. Greg Abbott called the shooting, where 10 people were killed and 13 others injured, "one of the most heinous attacks that we've ever seen in the history of Texas schools."
The suspect, 17-year-old Dimitrios Pagourtzis, is in custody and has been charged with capital murder, officials said. The suspect allegedly wrote in journals that he wanted to carry out the shooting and then commit suicide, but he gave himself up to authorities, according to Abbott.
9. June 10: Domestic violence incident in Florida, 4 victims
PHOTO: Orlando Police Chief John Mina arrives at an afternoon news conference during a hostage standoff in Orlando, Fla., June 11, 2018.
Orlando Police Chief John Mina arrives at an afternoon news conference during a hostage standoff in Orlando, Fla., June 11, 2018.
John Raoux/AP, FILE
Four young children were fatally shot by their mother's boyfriend and the suspect shot an officer in the head after police responded to the scene.
Orlando Police Chief John Mina said the suspect, Gary Lindsey Jr., was the father of two of the children -- Dove Lindsey, 1, and Aiden Lindsey, 6. He allegedly killed them along with the other two children in the home -- Lillia Pluth, 10, and Irayan Pluth, 12 -- in the altercation. Lindsey then killed himself at the scene.
Orlando Police Department officer Kevin Valencia was shot in the head and remains in a coma more than five months after the incident, according to a spokesperson for the department.
10. June 28: Shooting at Maryland newspaper office, 5 victims
PHOTO: Police tape blocks access from a street leading to the building complex where The Capital Gazette is located in Annapolis, Md., June 29, 2018.
Police tape blocks access from a street leading to the building complex where The Capital Gazette is located in Annapolis, Md., June 29, 2018.
Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images, FILE
The shooting at a Maryland newsroom that killed five people was a targeted attack, according to local police.
The suspect, armed with a shotgun, looked for victims in the newsroom of the Capital Gazette, a daily newspaper in Annapolis, which is located in the first floor of a multi-office building, Anne Arundel Police Department Deputy Chief Bill Krampf said at the time.
Rob Hiaasen, 59, Wendi Winters, 65, Gerald Fischman, 61, John McNamara, 56, and Rebecca Smith, 34, all were shot to death, allegedly by 38-year-old Jarrod Ramos, who had a longstanding feud with the newspaper and has been charged with five counts of first-degree murder.
11. July 9: Domestic violence incident in Delaware, 4 victims
A man in Wilmington shot his wife and three children before shooting himself, the Delaware State Police reported. Julie Edwards, 41, and a 6 year-old boy, a 4 year-old girl and a 3-year-old boy were all killed by Matthew Edwards, 42, authorities said.
The case was ruled a murder-suicide by the Delaware State Police.
12. July 27: Domestic violence incident in Texas, 4 victims
A man killed his 85-year-old father, 60-year-old stepmother, her 41-year-old son and the couple's adopted 13-year-old son before turning the gun on himself, according to the Alice Echo News Journal.
The two sons, Roel Mireles, 41, and Isaiah Starry, 13, were found shot dead at their parent's residence and their parents, Ernest Starry and Thelma Montalvo, were found dead at a nursing home in Robstown, Texas, alongside their suspect son, Richard Starry, the paper reported.
13. Sept. 12: Domestic violence incident in California, 5 victims
PHOTO: A standoff between officers and Javier Casarez, 54, moments before he fatally shot himself during a confrontation in Bakersfield, Calif., Sept. 12, 2018.
This photo from video from a deputy's body camera, provided by the Kern County, Calif., Sheriff's Office, shows a standoff between officers and Javier Casarez, 5...
Kern County Sheriff's Office/AP
A man shot his ex-wife and four other people, some of whom appeared to be responding to his first gunshots, in Bakersfield.
ABC-owned station KABC reported that there were two separate but related shootings before the suspect shot himself when he was confronted by a sheriff's deputy.
The suspect, Javier Casarez, killed his ex-wife Petra Maribel Bolanos De Casarez. Their divorce was finalized in June, months after he claimed in court that he believed his wife was cheating on him, according to KABC.
14. Sept. 17: Domestic violence incident in Maryland, 4 victims
A father fatally shot his wife, his 10-year-old son and his 22-year-old stepdaughter before killing himself at their home in their Montgomery County, Maryland.
He also shot his 11-year-old daughter, who died three days later, according to NBC Washington.
NBC Washington reported that the suspect, Yong Mun Kim, left names and phone numbers of relatives for police, which suggests he planned the murder-suicide.
15. Oct. 13: Shooting at a birthday party in Texas, 4 victims
A toddler's first birthday party turned deadly following an alleged altercation between two families attending the party.
Texas Department of Public Safety officials said that four men were fatally shot and two others were wounded, with two suspects fleeing the scene, the Associated Press reported.
16. Oct. 15: Mother kills teenage children and herself in Tennessee, 4 victims
A mother killed her four teenage children in their Columbia, Tenn., home before reportedly shooting herself, local law enforcement said.
The Tennessean reports that the four children were Bo Li, 14, Meigan Lin, 14, Lia Lin, 15, and Kaileigh Lin, 17. Their mother, Cynthia Collier, 55, was found with self-inflicted gunshot wounds.
The Associated Press reported that the bodies were discovered by an adult child who returned home from work, and a local sheriff said that the teen victims had all been adopted and home schooled.
17. Oct. 27: Shooting at a Pittsburgh synagogue, 11 victims
PHOTO: Rabbi Eli Wilansky lights a candle after a mass shooting at Tree of Life  Synagogue in Pittsburgh, Oct. 27, 2018. 
Rabbi Eli Wilansky lights a candle after a mass shooting at Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh, Oct. 27, 2018.
Steph Chambers/Pittsburgh Post-Gazette via AP
Eleven worshipers, including a 97-year-old woman, were gunned down inside the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh's Squirrel Hill neighborhood in what is believed to be the deadliest attack on Jews in America.
"Words escape me of what you can say," said Rabbi Jeffrey Myers, who was officiating a service when a gunman started shooting. "They were all beautiful, wonderful, good decent people. Hate was not in their vocabulary."
18. Nov. 7: Shooting at a California bar, 12 victims
PHOTO: People comfort each other, Nov. 8, 2018, after a mass shooting at the Borderline Bar &amp; Grill in Thousand Oaks late Wednesday night.
People comfort each other, Nov. 8, 2018, after a mass shooting at the Borderline Bar & Grill in Thousand Oaks late Wednesday night.
Wally Skalij/Los Angeles Times/Polaris
At least 12 people, including a police officer, were killed when a gunman opened fire in a packed Southern California bar during its "college night," leaving the community of Thousand Oaks in shock and in mourning.
The lone suspect, 28-year-old Ian David Long, was found dead inside the Borderline Bar & Grill after the overnight shooting, Ventura County Sheriff Geoff Dean said. Authorities believe he shot himself.
19. Nov. 19: Drug-related shooting in Philadelphia, 4 victims
Four people were killed in what was described by the Associated Press as a drug sale gone awry in Philadelphia.
The victims were identified as William Taylor and Akeen Mattox, along with sisters Tiyaniah Rakele Hopkins and Yaleah Hall.
"At a minimum, three people were collateral damage in a horrific incident," police commissioner Richard Ross said, according to the AP.
Philadelphia police confirmed that the four suspects -- Jahlil Porter, Robert Long, Nasir Moss Robertson, and Keith Garner -- are facing murder, robbery, and criminal conspiracy charges among others.
20. Dec. 28: Boyfriend kills girlfriend, her kids, and her mother in Missouri, 4 victims
PHOTO: Barb Moran places a stuffed animal in the center of a memorial in honor of Kate Kasten and her children in St. Charles, Mo., Dec. 30, 2018. 
Barb Moran places a stuffed animal in the center of a memorial in honor of Kate Kasten, her children, Zoe Kasten, 8, and Jonathan Kasten, 10, and Kate Kasten's...
Laurie Skrivan/St. Louis Post-Dispatch via AP
The suspect, Richard Darren Emery, was arrested on suspicion of killing his live-in girlfriend, Kate Kasten, her son Jonathan Kasten, 10, her daughter Zoe Kasten, 8, and her mother Jane Moeckel.
Emery lived with Kate Kasten and her two children, whose father Kory died about two years ago after a years-long battle with cancer. Jane Moeckel -- Kate Kasten’s mother -- was staying with Emery and Kasten temporarily as she recovered from knee surgery, according to Kasten's father and Moeckel's ex-husband Rick Moeckel, who spoke to ABC News.
“The whole thing is confusing,” said Rick Moeckel, who also lost two grandchildren.
He added that he remembered Emergy as a "nice guy."
Emery was arrested after avoiding police for several hours -- attempting to steal a woman’s car and attacking her -- before being apprehended at a convenience store. He now faces 15 charges -- including four counts of first-degree murder, seven counts of armed criminal action, three counts of first-degree assault, and one count of attempted robbery.
U.S. averaging nearly two mass shootings a day in 2022
The United States is averaging nearly two mass shootings a day, with the latest taking place at a Walmart in Virginia on Tuesday night. Photo by Shawn Thew/EPA-EFE
Nov. 23 (UPI) -- When a Walmart employee walked into a break room with a pistol and started shooting his fellow employees, it was another in a long line of massacres, as the number of such events nearly double the number of days this year.
The Gun Violence Archive defines a mass shooting as four or more people being shot or killed, not including the shooter. Tuesday night's shooting in Chesapeake, Va., that killed six people became the 606th mass shooting in 2022.
Nearly 40,000 people have been killed this year as a result of gun violence as mass shootings have permeated all areas of life, from schools to grocery stores to holiday celebrations.
Just before Tuesday night's massacre in Walmart, the nation was still reeling from a shooting in a gay Colorado nightclub that erupted just before midnight on Sunday. Five people were killed and another 25 were wounded during that episode.
The mass casualty event occurred at Club Q, which until recently was the only LGBTQ+ nightclub in the city of 484,000 residents.
The suspect began shooting upon entering the club, Colorado Springs Police Chief Adrian Vasquez said two "heroic" people fought with him and were able to stop him from killing and hurting others before officers arrived.
"Colorado Springs is once again in mourning after the tragic shooting at Club Q late last night," Colorado Springs Mayor John Suthers said in a statement. "Our hearts go out to the victims and their families who are bearing the weight of this horrific tragedy."
Perhaps the most infamous massacre occurred in May when a gunman opened fire at the Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas, leaving 19 students and at least two adults dead. The police have faced heavy criticism for their inaction while the shooting happened.
A report by a Texas House Committee found that 376 law enforcement officers -- a force larger than the garrison that defended the Alamo -- descended upon the school in a chaotic, uncoordinated scene that lasted for more than an hour. The group was devoid of clear leadership, basic communications and sufficient urgency to take down the gunman.
Some of the mass shootings have been racially motivated. Just a few days before the shooting in Uvalde, an 18-year-old white man, identified as Payton Gendron, fatally shot 10 people in a Buffalo grocery store. In July Gendron was indicted on 27 counts of federal hate crimes. Authorities said Gendron had posted a manifesto online that allegedly made numerous racist and anti-immigration remarks.
The following month, in June, a shooting at Saint Francis Hospital in Tulsa, Okla., left four people dead. The shooter also died by suicide. Tulsa police Capt. Richard Meulenberg said the shooting broke out in the afternoon at the Natalie Medical Building at the hospital. A police officer inside the building at the time said the shooting happened on a lower level.
Even Fourth of July celebrations could not stop the spate of mass shootings. A gunman, identified as Robert "Bobby" Crimo, opened fire from a rooftop and shot and killed seven people during a Fourth of July parade in Illinois. However, there were many other gun incidents that weekend.
Police also confirmed that three people died and another seven were injured in an overnight shooting in Gary, Ind.
In New York City, authorities said two people were killed in a shooting near a deli in Brooklyn. A third victim was reported to be in critical condition.
In Philadelphia, two police officers were wounded by gunfire during July 4 celebrations.
An October shooting in Raleigh, N.C., left five people dead and two others wounded. One of those killed in that shooting was an off-duty police officer. Raleigh Mayor Mary-Ann Baldwin said that much more needed to be done across the country.
"We must stop this mindless violence in America. We must address gun violence," she said. "We have much to do, and tonight we have much to mourn."
Mass shootings have also hit college campuses. Earlier this month a former member of the University of Virginia football team shot and killed three other football players on a bus.
"I am heartbroken to report that the shooting has resulted in three fatalities," University President Jim Ryan wrote in a tweet. "This is a message any leader hopes never to have to send, and I am devastated that this violence has visited the University of Virginia."
After the Colorado Springs shooting, President Joe Biden issued yet another call for gun reform, which Republicans in Congress have repeatedly failed to address despite the massacres.
"Today, yet another community in America has been torn apart by gun violence. More families left with an empty chair at the table and hole in their lives that cannot be filled," he said. "When will we decide we've had enough? We must address the public health epidemic of gun violence in all of its forms."

US Gun Violence Soars in 2022
Mass shootings in the USA in 2022
Across America, gun violence surged in many communities in 2022 as overall death rates from firearms rose to the highest level in nearly three decades. The year saw a near-record number of mass casualty shooting incidents, including several allegedly motivated by hate.
“For God’s sake, how much more carnage are we willing to accept? How many more innocent American lives must be taken before we say enough is enough?” asked U.S. President Joe Biden in a nationally televised address in May — days after the deadliest U.S. school shooting incident in nearly a decade.
Biden joined the nation in mourning after an 18-year-old gunman wielding a semi-automatic rifle killed 19 children and two adults at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas.
The attacker, a former student at the school, fired hundreds of rounds as he carried out the massacre. Heavily armed law enforcement officers delayed storming the building for approximately an hour, sparking outrage from the community and across the nation.
The young lives taken illustrate a sobering statistic that guns are now the number one killer of children in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The tragedy came less than a month after another a 19-year-old — also armed with a semi-automatic rifle — opened fire at a supermarket in Buffalo, New York, killing 10 people. The suspect said he was targeting Black people.
In November, a mass shooting at a Colorado Springs gay nightclub claimed five lives and left 17 others wounded. The 22-year-old suspect was charged with murder and bias-motivated crimes.
“We are seeing a return to much higher rates of gun violence than we have seen for a long time,” said Jack McDevitt, a professor at Northeastern University School of Criminology and Criminal Justice in Boston, Massachusetts, speaking with VOA. “We are starting to see more people use firearms to go after victims who they perceive to be different.”
US Gun Violence Climbs in 2022
0:00 0:03:31
Analysts believe guns, especially semiautomatic handguns and rifles, are being used more often to settle disputes and in crimes motivated by hate.
Investigators are looking into the possibility that antisemitism was the motivation for a gunman who killed seven people and wounded dozens of others gathered for a July 4 Independence Day parade in Highland Park, Illinois. From atop a building, the suspect fired 83 rounds in less than a minute.
“Our sense of security is permanently ruptured,” said Dr. Emily Lieberman, a pediatrician who witnessed the shooting with her children. She and a group of fellow doctors traveled to Washington in December to urge lawmakers to pass a ban on assault weapons.
“As mass shootings continue to rise year after year, I realize that complacency is just as dangerous as these attacks themselves.," she said. "The time is now to save lives.”
Mass shootings rise
The U.S. experienced more than 600 mass shootings in 2022, nearly double the number recorded four years ago when there were 336, according to Washington-based Gun Violence Archive.
Mass shootings in the U.S. by year, Source: Gun Violence Archive.
Mass shootings in the U.S. by year, Source: Gun Violence Archive.
Mass shootings are broadly defined as an incident in which four or more people are shot or killed, not including the shooter.
Analysts see a link between bias-motivated gun violence and a rise in hate groups and toxic discourse in the United States targeting vulnerable, often marginalized populations.
“One of the problems with seeing gun violence in the context of hate crimes is that the trauma isn’t just to the individual; the trauma is to that community,” said Professor Carlos Cuevas, co-director of the Center on Crime, Race and Justice at Northeastern University. “It is a crime against a person but it is also a crime against a group.”
While mass shootings grab news headlines, they account for a small percentage of the more than 40,000 U.S. gun deaths recorded in 2022. Half were by suicide, according to Gun Violence Archive.
“One of the positive things in all of this is that mass shooting events are the most visible but the least frequently occurring ones,” Cuevas noted. “It’s important to provide continuing support to communities and help them recover a sense of safety that will help them heal from these events going forward.”
Debate over gun laws
In June, Congress approved the first national gun legislation in decades. The law seeks to deny firearms to those deemed dangerous and a threat to public safety. It would also fund new mental health programs and require enhanced background checks on gun buyers aged 18 to 21.
Many Republican lawmakers opposed the legislation. “Democrats are coming after law-abiding American citizens’ Second Amendment liberties,” said Ohio Republican Congressman Jim Jordan, referring to the constitutional right to “keep and bear arms” that gun rights defenders believe should be broadly protected.
But many Democrats and gun control advocates want to go further and ban semi-automatic weapons, among other restrictions.
“Now the moral imperative is to act against ghost guns [untraceable firearms often bought online], against assault weapons, against high-capacity magazines, against a system that allows people to keep guns when they say they are going to kill themselves and others,” said Connecticut Democratic Senator Richard Blumenthal in December.
Georgia resident Henderson Masiyakurima said his perspective on gun legislation changed after his best friend was shot to death in 2017. “My thought on weapons and guns was like, “Oh, I’m defending myself,” he said in an interview with the Reuters news agency. “Lately it just looks like, it’s just, been going crazy with a lot of this gun violence. It’s time for a change.”
While many gun rights advocates bemoaned the law passed by Congress, they cheered a U.S. Supreme Court decision striking down a New York state law that restricted the carrying of concealed handguns in public.
“They are lawful citizens that have the right to bear arms. And they also have the right, now the Supreme Court has said it, to bear arms outside the home and protect themselves,” said Tiffany Cheuvront, an attorney for the California Rifle and Pistol Association.
Following the ruling, some Democrat-led states moved to enhance gun laws while Republican-led states sought to challenge or eliminate existing gun restrictions.
Gun availability
The changing legal landscape for firearms comes as gun ownership continues to grow in the United States.
American gunmakers churned out more than 11 million firearms in 2020, nearly three times the number manufactured in 2000, according to a report by the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. A survey by the nonpartisan Small Arms Survey estimated the U.S. had about 400 million firearms in 2018, more guns than the country’s population.
As the number of firearms grows, the United States remains plagued by the highest rate of gun deaths among advanced industrialized nations.
“It looked like we were moving the needle pretty well in terms of reducing gun violence, but we have seen it come back with a vengeance over the past three or four years,” said criminologist McDevitt. “The reality is we should be comparing ourselves to other countries where it’s hard to get guns, like Britain and Japan, where gun violence rates are 10 times less than in some of the safest U.S. states.”

US passes 600 mass shootings for third straight year
US passes 600 mass shootings for third straight year
The U.S. has seen more than 600 mass shootings for three straight years.
According to the nonprofit Gun Violence Archive, there have been 609 incidents in 2022 in which four or more people, other than the attacker, were shot — putting the U.S. on pace to reach around 675 by the end of the year.
Last year saw a staggering 690 mass shootings across the nation, up from 610 in 2020 and 417 in 2019.
“The country is three mass shootings away from 2022 being the second-highest yearly total since we began tracking data,” the GVA database researchers said Wednesday. By Thursday, the country was just two shootings away from that dark milestone.
Five people were killed in a mass shooting at Club Q nightclub in Colorado Springs, Colo., earlier this week, and six were killed Wednesday at a Walmart in Chesapeake, Va.
The recent deaths add to the grim total number of gun violence deaths in the U.S. this year, which the Gun Violence Archive database puts at 39,816. 
More than 18,000 of those deaths were homicides, while around 21,500 were suicides.
“GVA had never logged a month of 60+ mass shootings before 2020. It happened five times in 2020, six times in 2021, and now six times again this year,” the GVA researchers said after the Colorado incident.
The U.S. has experienced an average of 1.68 mass shootings per day so far this year, according to GVA. The average has been above 1 each year since 2019, with 1.9 mass shootings per day in 2021.

What the data says about gun deaths in the U.S.
More Americans died of gun-related injuries in 2020 than in any other year on record, according to recently published statistics from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). That included a record number of gun murders, as well as a near-record number of gun suicides. Despite the increase in such fatalities, the rate of gun deaths – a statistic that accounts for the nation’s growing population – remains below the levels of earlier years.
Here’s a closer look at gun deaths in the United States, based on a Pew Research Center analysis of data from the CDC, the FBI and other sources. You can also read key public opinion findings about U.S. gun violence and gun policy in our recent roundup.
How many people die from gun-related injuries in the U.S. each year?
A pie chart showing that suicides accounted for more than half of U.S. gun deaths in 2020
In 2020, the most recent year for which complete data is available, 45,222 people died from gun-related injuries in the U.S., according to the CDC. That figure includes gun murders and gun suicides, along with three other, less common types of gun-related deaths tracked by the CDC: those that were unintentional, those that involved law enforcement and those whose circumstances could not be determined. The total excludes deaths in which gunshot injuries played a contributing, but not principal, role. (CDC fatality statistics are based on information contained in official death certificates, which identify a single cause of death.)
What share of U.S. gun deaths are murders and what share are suicides?
Though they tend to get less public attention than gun-related murders, suicides have long accounted for the majority of U.S. gun deaths. In 2020, 54% of all gun-related deaths in the U.S. were suicides (24,292), while 43% were murders (19,384), according to the CDC. The remaining gun deaths that year were unintentional (535), involved law enforcement (611) or had undetermined circumstances (400).
What share of all murders and suicides in the U.S. involve a gun?
Nearly eight-in-ten (79%) U.S. murders in 2020 – 19,384 out of 24,576 – involved a firearm. That marked the highest percentage since at least 1968, the earliest year for which the CDC has online records. A little over half (53%) of all suicides in 2020 – 24,292 out of 45,979 – involved a gun, a percentage that has generally remained stable in recent years.
How has the number of U.S. gun deaths changed over time?
The 45,222 total gun deaths in 2020 were by far the most on record, representing a 14% increase from the year before, a 25% increase from five years earlier and a 43% increase from a decade prior.
Gun murders, in particular, have climbed sharply in recent years. The 19,384 gun murders that took place in 2020 were the most since at least 1968, exceeding the previous peak of 18,253 recorded by the CDC in 1993. The 2020 total represented a 34% increase from the year before, a 49% increase over five years and a 75% increase over 10 years.
The number of gun suicides has also risen in recent years – climbing 10% over five years and 25% over 10 years – and is near its highest point on record. The 24,292 gun suicides that took place in 2020 were the most in any year except 2018, when there were 24,432.
How has the rate of U.S. gun deaths changed over time?
While 2020 saw the highest total number of gun deaths in the U.S., this statistic does not take into account the nation’s growing population. On a per capita basis, there were 13.6 gun deaths per 100,000 people in 2020 – the highest rate since the mid-1990s, but still well below the peak of 16.3 gun deaths per 100,000 people in 1974.
A line graph showing that U.S. gun suicide and gun murder rates have increased in recent years, but remain below past highs
The gun murder and gun suicide rates in the U.S. both remain below their peak levels. There were 6.2 gun murders per 100,000 people in 2020, below the rate of 7.2 recorded in 1974. And there were 7.0 gun suicides per 100,000 people in 2020, below the rate of 7.7 measured in 1977. (One caveat when considering the 1970s figures: In the CDC’s database, gun murders and gun suicides between 1968 and 1978 are classified as those caused by firearms and explosives. In subsequent years, they are classified as deaths involving firearms only.)
Which states have the highest and lowest gun death rates in the U.S.?
A map showing that U.S. gun death rates varied widely by state in 2020
The rate of gun fatalities varies widely from state to state. In 2020, the states with the highest rates of gun-related deaths – counting murders, suicides and all other categories tracked by the CDC – included Mississippi (28.6 per 100,000 people), Louisiana (26.3), Wyoming (25.9), Missouri (23.9) and Alabama (23.6). The states with the lowest rates included New York (5.3), Rhode Island (5.1), New Jersey (5.0), Massachusetts (3.7) and Hawaii (3.4).
How does the gun death rate in the U.S. compare with other countries?
The gun death rate in the U.S. is much higher than in most other nations, particularly developed nations. But it is still far below the rates in several Latin American countries, according to a 2018 study of 195 countries and territories by researchers at the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington.
The U.S. gun death rate was 10.6 per 100,000 people in 2016, the most recent year in the study, which used a somewhat different methodology from the CDC. That was far higher than in countries such as Canada (2.1 per 100,000) and Australia (1.0), as well as European nations such as France (2.7), Germany (0.9) and Spain (0.6). But the rate in the U.S. was much lower than in El Salvador (39.2 per 100,000 people), Venezuela (38.7), Guatemala (32.3), Colombia (25.9) and Honduras (22.5), the study found. Overall, the U.S. ranked 20th in its gun fatality rate that year.
How many people are killed in mass shootings in the U.S. every year?
This is a difficult question to answer because there is no single, agreed-upon definition of the term “mass shooting.” Definitions can vary depending on factors including the number of victims and the circumstances of the shooting.
The FBI collects data on “active shooter incidents,” which it defines as “one or more individuals actively engaged in killing or attempting to kill people in a populated area.” Using the FBI’s definition, 38 people – excluding the shooters – died in such incidents in 2020.
The Gun Violence Archive, an online database of gun violence incidents in the U.S., defines mass shootings as incidents in which four or more people are shot, even if no one was killed (again excluding the shooters). Using this definition, 513 people died in these incidents in 2020.
Regardless of the definition being used, fatalities in mass shooting incidents in the U.S. account for a small fraction of all gun murders that occur nationwide each year.
How has the number of mass shootings in the U.S. changed over time?
A chart showing that active shooter incidents have become more common in the U.S. in recent years
The same definitional issue that makes it challenging to arrive at an exact number of mass shooting fatalities comes into play when trying to determine the frequency of U.S. mass shootings over time. The unpredictability of these incidents also complicates matters: As Rand Corp. noted in a research brief, “Chance variability in the annual number of mass shooting incidents makes it challenging to discern a clear trend, and trend estimates will be sensitive to outliers and to the time frame chosen for analysis.”
The FBI found an increase in active shooter incidents between 2000 and 2020. There were three such incidents in 2000; by 2020, that figure had increased to 40.
Which types of firearms are most commonly used in gun murders in the U.S.?
In 2020, handguns were involved in 59% of the 13,620 U.S. gun murders and non-negligent manslaughters for which data is available, according to the FBI. Rifles – the category that includes guns sometimes referred to as “assault weapons” – were involved in 3% of firearm murders. Shotguns were involved in 1%. The remainder of gun homicides and non-negligent manslaughters (36%) involved other kinds of firearms or those classified as “type not stated.”
It’s important to note that the FBI’s statistics do not capture the details on all gun murders in the U.S. each year. The FBI’s data is based on information voluntarily submitted by police departments around the country, and not all agencies participate or provide complete information each year.
Note: This is an update of a post originally published on Aug. 16, 2019.

Mass Shootings
The Center for Disaster Philanthropy does not include mass shootings of any kind in its taxonomy of disasters, nor do we respond or provide resources for mass shootings or other acts of public violence. However, due to numerous requests for information, below is some basic information on mass shootings to help funders impacted by an event in their community.
There is no commonly agreed-upon term to define a mass shooting, only “mass killing,” which Congress defines as three or more people killed in a single incident, not including the perpetrator. The Gun Violence Archive builds on that definition to define a mass shooting as “four or more people are shot or killed in a single incident, not including the shooter.”
Although all mass shootings are criminal acts, there are multiple kinds of shootings, which account for the different numbers reported.
The Gun Violence Archive does not exclude any shooting incident, as long as it meets the total number shot or killed. The circumstances in which they were shot, therefore, does not matter. As a result, their numbers tend to be higher than other lists, which is also true because they include victims and not just fatalities.
According to Guns & America, “The FBI does not use ‘mass shooting’ but rather tracks active shooter incidents. They exclude drug or gang violence and ‘accidental discharges of a gun.’ It says an ‘active shooter is an individual actively engaged in killing or attempting to kill people in a populated area.’”
The initiative also “defines these incidents as the shooting of two or more people in a single incident, in a public place. This definition excludes crimes of armed robbery, gang violence, or domestic violence, focusing on cases in which the motive appears to be indiscriminate mass murder.” This is similar to the Mother Jones definition, except the magazine considers four victims rather than two.
Another area of confusion is school shootings. Although some trackers include any shooting that occurs on a school campus, the Government Accountability Office narrowed the definition to focus on “instances where students or staff were at risk [and] defined a school shooting as ‘any time a gun is fired on school grounds, on a bus, during a school event, during school hours, or right before or after school.’ This definition, therefore, would exclude suicides in a parking lot or a gang incident in a school playground on the weekend.
Key Facts
Mass shootings account for less than 1% of all firearm deaths. This statistic from 2009-2019 would be higher if mass shootings related to domestic violence are included in that number.
In 2019, there were 418 shootings with four or more victims, shot or killed. This is according to data tracked by the Gun Violence Archive.
Shootings have a negative economic outcome. A study by the Urban Institute on shootings in Washington, D.C., found that “Every 10 additional gunshots in a census tract each year is associated with 20 fewer jobs among new establishments, one less new business opening, and one more business closing the same year.”
Gun suicides – made possible by lack of gun control – result in more suicides in rural areas compared to urban areas. Guns & America says, “Firearms are the most common method of suicide and suicide accounts for the vast majority of gun deaths in this country. More than 24,000 Americans died by firearm suicide in 2018, according to the latest figures from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.” Studies from Everytown for Gun Safety and CDC found that rural suicides have increased disproportionately compared to urban suicide rates.
Active shooters are just one of several public attack methods. According to Ready.Gov, potential attacks in crowded and public spaces include, “Individuals using firearms to cause mass casualties; individuals using a vehicle to cause mass casualties; individuals using homemade bombs to cause mass casualties and other methods of mass attacks may include knives, fires, drones or other weapons.”
Victims of crime compensation programs distribute billions of dollars annually. Federally funded through the Department of Justice’s Office of Victims of Crimes (OVC) and state-administered, this fund is available to support victims of several kinds of violent crimes, including mass shootings. The spending limit was capped at around $500 million (serving 200,000 people) for several years but expanded in 2014 when the fund grew to more than $10 billion. From 2015-2019, compensation amounts ranged from $2.5 billion to $4.5 billion a year. The 2019 appropriation cap was $3.35 billion. According to OVC, money for these programs come from “criminal fines, forfeited bail bonds, penalties, and special assessments collected by U.S. Attorneys’ Offices, federal courts, and the Federal Bureau of Prisons. Federal revenues deposited into the Fund also come from gifts, donations, and bequests by private parties, as provided by an amendment to VOCA through the USA PATRIOT Act in 2001 that went into effect in 2002. Since 2002, hundreds of thousands of dollars have been deposited into the Fund through this provision.” This revenue varies from year to year. In 2017, two billion-dollar fines, including $2.8 from Volkswagen for an emissions cheating scandal, increased the fund to $13 billion, but in 2018 only $445 million was added to the fund and $4.5 billion spent.
Gun control helps reduce mass shootings. Although there is no perfect solution to ending gun violence, research has shown that when gun control laws are stricter, there are fewer mass shootings. Some gun control advocacy groups grew out of tragic shootings such as Moms Demand Action for Gun Violence in America, which was founded in the wake of Sandy Hook. Moms Demand Action “is a grassroots movement of Americans fighting for public safety measures that can protect people from gun violence. We pass stronger gun laws and work to close the loopholes that jeopardize the safety of our families.”
Response to a mass shooting typically includes government, individual and philanthropic support. For example, after the Pulse Orlando shooting, CDP and Candid “identified 55 institutional pledges and transactions totaling $7.5 million in response to the tragedy” in its Measuring the State of Disaster Philanthropy report. “Twenty-six were directed to Strengthen Orlando, a Florida-based nonprofit affiliated with the OneOrlando Fund, created by Mayor Buddy Dyer in response to the shooting. The OneOrlando Fund focused its grantmaking on survivors and victims’ families and distributed a total of $31.7 million. Fifty-five percent (30 pledges/transactions) came from corporations, either through their corporate giving programs or their foundations. The two largest gifts were $1 million each: The Walt Disney Company Contributions Program and the NBCUniversal Contributions Program both announced gifts to the OneOrlando Fund. The U.S. Department of Justice also committed $8.5 million to assist victims, witnesses, and first responders; the grant was distributed through the Florida Office of the Attorney General’s Department of Legal Affairs.”
How to Help
In the U.S., the federal government has several resources to support victims of mass shootings. This financial support usually comes through OVC, a component of the Office of Justice Programs at the DOJ, as opposed to FEMA or the Department of Homeland Security as is standard with disasters.
Funders do have a role within their community if they wish to support response to a mass shooting. They can manage one or more funds for victims or first responders, support trauma-informed and supportive services, advocate around gun control and engage in community education.
Host a fund for victims. Many people want to make donations after a tragedy but do not know where to give. Often, individual funds are started on platforms such as GoFundMe. Still, a coordinated fund through a local or community foundation can help ensure an equitable and fair process for fund distribution. Depending upon the tragedy, there may be a need to support a fund for first responders who witness the violence or aftermath.
Fund mental health and trauma services. A mass shooting in a community can affect more than just those in attendance at the school, the event or the location where the shooting occurred. The broader community can also be affected. Broad, wide-ranging mental health and trauma-informed services are often required for several years to help heal the community.
Support advocacy efforts for gun control. In the aftermath of the 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, the families of those killed formed Sandy Hook Promise. This national nonprofit organization seeks “to honor all victims of gun violence by turning our tragedy into a moment of transformation. By empowering youth to ‘know the signs’ and uniting all people who value the protection of children, we can take meaningful actions in schools, homes, and communities to prevent gun violence and stop the tragic loss of life.” Similarly, following the Parkland shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in 2018, the teen victims and students created the #NeverAgain hashtag and began a social media and speaking advocacy campaign to prevent more school shootings. Everytown for Gun Safety has a number of research-based policy initiatives and solutions that can reduce gun violence, including mass shootings, domestic violence shootings, crime-based killings, accidental shootings and suicides.
Help build a collaboration of funders. After the shooting at the Pulse nightclub, several philanthropic serving organizations including, but not limited to, the United Philanthropy Forum, Funders for LGBTQ Issues, Change Philanthropy, Emerging Practitioners in Philanthropy, Hispanics in Philanthropy, Native Americans in Philanthropy and Women’s Funding Network co-sponsored teleconferences to bring together national and regional funders and foundations that wanted to contribute to a response. By taking on the responsibility to organizing and host the events, these organizations allowed local funders affected by the shooting to focus on their community’s immediate needs. This funding and work should be directed towards supporting the larger community needs, not individual victims.
Contribute to the victims of crimes fund federally or to similar state/local funds. The spending cap is determined by the amount of revenue put into the fund. Donations can help ensure that victims receive full support after a mass shooting.
What Funders Are Doing
Government support is usually available to victims of mass shootings, including the families of those deceased, people who are shot and people in/at the location but not shot. Crime victim compensation is a federally-funded and state-administered program.
According to the National Association of Crime Victim Compensation Boards, “Compensation programs can pay for a wide variety of expenses and losses related to criminal injury and homicide. Beyond medical care, mental health treatment, funerals, and lost wages, a number of programs also cover crime-scene cleanup, travel costs to receive treatment, moving expenses, and the cost of housekeeping and child care if a victim is unable to perform those tasks. And states continue to work with victims and advocates to find new ways to help victims with more of the costs of recovery. … Maximum benefits available from the states average $25,000, with some states able to offer more, and some states having lower limits.  Lower caps within the maximum are common for some types of benefits, like funeral and burial costs, mental health counseling, or lost wages.”
The Ventura County Community Foundation (VCCF) set up a Conejo Valley Victims Fund after the Thousand Oaks shooting on November 7, 2018. VCCF did this in coordination with the City of Thousand Oaks, Conrad N. Hilton Foundation, Amgen Foundation, California Community Foundation and other funders. The Fund developed a protocol so that 100% of the funds went towards assisting the families of the victims who were killed or physically injured and those present inside the Borderline Bar & Grill that tragic night. The Conejo Valley Victims Fund’s payments are based on the severity of the injury to the victims.
The Contigo Fund was established in the aftermath of the Pulse Orlando shooting at an LGBTQ nightclub. Under the umbrella of Our Fund Foundation, a nonprofit LGBTQ philanthropic organization, Contigo’s mission is to fund, strengthen and empower existing agencies and emerging ones working to improve the lives of LGBTQ and Latinx individuals, immigrants and people of color in Central Florida. Unlike the Conejo Valley Victims Fund, Contigo funds organizations working on healing and empowerment, leadership development, bridge-building, racial/social/gender justice and work led by women/trans/gender-expansive/intersex leaders and youth. They focus on Central Florida’s diverse communities, especially building connections between LGBTQ, Latinx, Muslim, Immigrant and Black communities.
The OneOrlando Fund was used to bring together various funds, together with the National Compassion Fund, to allocate funding to four groups of people: individuals killed as a result of the Pulse Nightclub attack, individuals who were injured and had to spent at least one night in hospital, injured parties treated within 48 hours as an outpatient and individuals who were present but not injured.
In 2019, the John Ben Snow Memorial Trust made a $5,000 grant to the Trauma Intervention Program of Northern Nevada, Inc. TIP is a national nonprofit organization of volunteers dedicated to ensuring that those who are emotionally traumatized in emergency situations receive the assistance they need. TIP Northern Nevada has responded to the shootings at Sparks Middle School, Renown Medical Campus, Carson City IHOP and Hug High School.
In 2017, the Community Foundation of Greater Chattanooga made a $1,500 grant to the American Red Cross to support Nevada Shootings and California Wildfires.


What You Need to Know About the Rise in U.S. Mass Shootings
A high-profile mass shooting at a Chicago suburb’s July 4 parade was the nation’s fourth in recent weeks.
Max Herman/AFP, via Getty Images
A man with gray hair, wearing a plum-colored t-shirt, has his arm around a woman with reddish-brown hair, wearing a blue t-shirt. She is holding hands with a woman with blonde hair, wearing a red t-shirt.  They all stand in front of police tape, looking down the street.  
Curious how we did this? Read our methodology.
On the morning of July 4, President Joe Biden hailed the day as one to “celebrate the goodness of our nation.”
Shortly after his tweet, a gunman on a rooftop opened fire into a crowd of spectators who gathered to enjoy a Fourth of July parade in a Chicago suburb. He killed seven people and injured dozens.
Monday’s mass shooting in Highland Park, Illinois, brought fresh anguish to a nation already shaken this year by the murders of schoolchildren in Uvalde, Texas, and Black shoppers in Buffalo, New York.
If it feels like mass shootings have become more frequent, that intuition is correct, according to data analysis by The Marshall Project.
There were more mass shootings in the past five years than in any other half-decade going back to 1966
30 mass shooting incidents
Source: The Violence Project Mass Shooter Database, analyzed by The Marshall Project.
Under one of the most conservative definitions of “mass shootings,” in which a gunman slaughters four or more strangers in a public place, the number of these crimes has indeed been climbing in the last few years — and they have higher death tolls, as well.
Mass shootings account for just a fraction of the daily toll of firearm deaths in the U.S., where about 124 people die every day in other acts of gun violence.
Our analysis is based on data from The Violence Project, a nonprofit research group that uses a narrow definition of mass shootings adopted from the Congressional Research Service, which advises federal lawmakers.
Thirty-one of these massacres occurred from 2017 through 2021, compared with 24 from 2012 through 2016, according to The Violence Project data. We compared five-year periods so we could measure trends over time, rather than focus on the dip to two incidents in 2020, which researchers attributed to the COVID-19 lockdown, or the spike caused by the 2017 mass shooting in Las Vegas that left 58 dead. The last five years have seen more mass shootings than any other comparable time span dating back to 1966.
The Violence Project defines mass shootings as single incidents in which four or more people are killed (not including the shooter), in public locations, such as schools, stores, or workplaces. It excludes murders that occur because of domestic violence, or in the course of another crime, such as armed robbery or gang violence.
Under this definition, there have been four mass shootings so far in 2022: Highland Park, Uvalde, Buffalo and Tulsa, Oklahoma, where a gunman stormed a doctor’s office at a hospital complex, killing four people before taking his own life. The count puts 2022 on pace with last year, when there were a total of six mass shootings.
Mass shootings have become increasingly deadly
150
300 people killed
Source: The Violence Project Mass Shooter Database, analyzed by The Marshall Project.
As mass shootings in the U.S. reached a record high, so did the number of deaths and injuries. From 2017 to 2021, perpetrators killed 295 people — about a third more than the 221 fatalities in the five-year period that ended in 2016. The number of people injured was five times higher.
Much of the increase in both deaths and injuries was attributable to the deadliest mass shooting in modern U.S. history, which occurred in 2017 at a music festival in Las Vegas. A gunman, armed with multiple assault weapons, killed 58 victims. An additional 887 people were injured, including scores hurt in a stampede, according to The Violence Project. But even excluding Las Vegas, the number of dead and injured was still higher in the last half decade when compared with the five years ending in 2016.
The number injured in mass shootings increased, even without the Las Vegas shooting
1,200 people injured
887 people injured
in Las Vegas massacre
Source: The Violence Project Mass Shooter Database, analyzed by The Marshall Project.
The mass shooting on July 4 was the fourth in fewer than three months. In all four, the gunmen used high-powered weapons, law enforcement authorities said. President Biden last month signed the most significant gun safety measure in decades, though the new law does not include a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines, a provision Biden and Democrats had wanted.
Our analysis shows that in the past five years, assault-style weapons have been used in nearly half of mass shootings, compared to a third of them in the previous five years.
There is no national, legal definition of a “mass shooting.” Several organizations track mass shootings, but use different yardsticks: Some count only incidents in which three or more people are killed; others measure incidents with at least four people killed or injured.
The lack of consensus on what qualifies as a mass shooting makes the problem confusing to talk about, let alone try to address, said Jacob Kaplan, a criminologist at the School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University.
“If you have one definition of a mass shooting and I have a different definition, it’s hard to really even have a conversation,” Kaplan said. “It’s not like one is obviously right, or obviously wrong. It’s just that you have to be very precise about what you’re talking about. And that’s something that tends to get lost in the media and definitely with politicians.”
Some researchers stress the importance of including injuries as well as fatalities when analyzing mass shootings. Jaclyn Schildkraut, a criminal justice professor at the State University of New York at Oswego, said that in recent years victims are more likely to be injured than killed because of faster police and paramedic responses and medical advances. Schildkraut is the interim director of the Regional Gun Violence Research Consortium at the Rockefeller Institute of Government, a public policy think tank based in Albany, New York.
She defines a mass shooting as an incident at a public place with multiple victims, both wounded or killed, and the shooter targets victims either randomly or “for their symbolic value,” such as Black congregants at a church. By this count, there have been 402 mass shootings with 3,590 deaths or injuries from 1966 to 2020, with a steep increase in recent years. More than half of these shootings — 219 — unfolded at the perpetrator's workplace or school.
Other measures of mass shootings have also increased in recent years.
The Gun Violence Archive, an independent research group, uses a broad definition of a mass shooting: an incident in which four or more people are killed or injured, not including the shooter. It includes shootings linked to gang activity, street fights or domestic violence.
The group counted 2,403 mass shootings from 2017 to 2021, with 2,495 dead and 10,225 injured. The group’s data reveals a steep rise in recent years: 692 mass shootings in 2021, up 66% from 2019’s total of 417.
The group tallied 318 mass shootings as of 3 p.m. on July 5. That puts 2022 on track to finish as one of the deadliest years since the group began monitoring these crimes in 2014.
Like The Violence Project, Everytown for Gun Safety defines a mass shooting as an incident in which four or more people are killed with a firearm, excluding the perpetrator. Everytown counts incidents that “occur in both public and private spaces, have any number of shooters, and result from a myriad of motives, such as group violence, domestic violence, or terrorist violence.” By the group’s count, there have been 110 incidents in the last five years, compared to 96 from 2012 through 2016.
The FBI tracks what it calls “active shooters”: one or more individuals actively engaged in killing or attempting to kill people in a populated area. Those cases have almost doubled since 2017, to 61 incidents in 2021 that left 103 people dead and injured 140 others.

For the third straight year, America hits grim milestone: 600-plus multiple victim shootings
The massacre at a Colorado Springs gay nightclub over the weekend continues the deadly and troubling trend.
Nov. 21, 2022, 11:46 PM CET
People hold a vigil at a makeshift memorial near Club Q on Nov. 20, 2022, in Colorado Springs, Colo.
When the shooting was over and five bodies were removed from a Colorado gay bar that a gunman had turned into a killing zone, yet another sad statistic went into the books: This is the third straight year that there have been more than 600 multiple victim shootings in America.
The figure was recorded by The Gun Violence Archive, a nonprofit that tracks the spread of what has been called an American disease and which defines a mass shooting as a single incident in which at least four people — other than the person wielding the gun — are shot.
The deadly attack Saturday on Club Q in Colorado Springs was the 601st such incident in 2022, according to the group. The GVA includes any type of shooting in its analysis including domestic violence, shootings in private homes, gang violence among others.
When a shooter opened fire at Walmart Supercenter in Chesapeake, Virginia, on Tuesday night, killing six people, the number of multiple victim shootings climbed to 607.
“This is the third consecutive year and only the third time in GVA data history that the country has reached over 600 incidents with 4+ shot and/or killed,” the GVA tweeted.
The GVA recorded 610 multiple victim shootings in 2020 and 690 last year, when the pandemic was already easing and the pace of deadly violence increased across the United States. It has been keeping a tally of mass shootings since 2014, when it recorded 273.
“Same story, different year,” Christopher Herrmann, an assistant professor at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York City, said. “Very sad.”
Lori Ann Post, director of the Buehler Center for Health Policy and Economics at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, uses a more conservative definition of mass shootings, which counts only incidents where four or more have been killed, not including the shooter and where the shooter goes to a place with the intent to kill as many people as possible. The GVA counts injuries and deaths in each incident.
But Post agrees that this kind of mass carnage has been on a rapid rise in the last three years.
“I fear we could get three more mass killings like this before the end of the year,” Post said, referring specifically to the attack on Club Q. “This was clearly a hate crime and these kinds of killings tend to happen in threes. One person will do one and inspire another.”
The experts weighed in on the same day that state prosecutors charged the suspect in the shooting with five counts of first-degree murder and five counts of bias-motivated crime-causing bodily injury. He was subdued by at least two people inside the club, but not before killing five people and wounding nearly two dozen more with a high-powered rifle, police said.
The carnage at Club Q, Herrmann said, echoed that of the 2016 massacre at Pulse in Orlando, Florida, a gay nightclub that became the setting for the deadliest mass shooting in U.S. history.
The difference, Herrmann said, is that mass shootings, mostly by disgruntled men armed with deadly weapons, are much more common now than they were six years ago.
“Scary to think that in 2016 we recorded 382 mass shootings and now we will probably end 2022 with an estimated 680 mass shootings,” said Herrmann, who based his estimate on the fact that there has been an average of 13 mass shootings a week this year. “That would give you a 2016 to 2022 increase of 78%.”
As for the motivation, it’s not just bigotry that drives a person to commit a mass shooting, the experts said.
“I have observed a fair share of family disputes that turn into mass murder,” Herrmann said.
Post said we saw a dip in the number of mass shootings during the height of the pandemic as those responsible for these events went into lockdown with the rest of the country.
“They want and need attention,” Post said. “During Covid, the presidential election, during the various (former President) Donald Trump shenanigans, there was no oxygen left for mass shooters.”
This mass shooting hitting the LGBTQ community wasn't surprising to Sarah Kate Ellis, president of the civil rights group GLAAD, who said increasing anti-LGBTQ rhetoric is part of the reason her community has been “under attack.”
“We have been screaming from the tops of mountains of LGBTQ leadership that an environment like this is being created (to foster) violence against our community,” Ellis said on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.”
A report released in August by the Human Rights Campaign, the country’s largest LGBTQ rights group, and the nongovernmental organization Center for Countering Digital Hate found anti-LGBTQ rhetoric surged online earlier this year in the wake of the passage of Florida’s Parental Rights in Education law. Critics have dubbed it the “Don’t Say Gay” law.

Phenomenon of 'leakage' key to heading off mass shootings: Expert
In an effort to stem the record number of mass shootings in the United States, the FBI has been studying for years the phenomenon of "leakage," a term describing would-be active shooters offering hints of their deadly plans either online or to family and friends prior to committing violent acts.
But retired FBI agent Katherine Schweit, who conducted research for the bureau on 160 active shooter incidents in the United States between 2000 and 2013, told ABC News that a series of recent mass shootings show that despite being aware of red flags, those closest to the perpetrators are often the least likely to inform law enforcement.
PHOTO: FILE - Payton Gendron is led into the courtroom for a hearing at Erie County Court in Buffalo, N.Y., on May 19, 2022.
Payton Gendron is led into the courtroom for a hearing at Erie County Court in Buffalo, N.Y., on May 19, 2022.
Matt Rourke/AP, FILE
She said the May 14 racially motivated mass shooting at a Buffalo, New York, supermarket; the May 24 Uvalde, Texas, elementary school massacre; and the Nov. 19 shooting targeting LGBTQ patrons at Club Q in Colorado Springs, Colorado, are examples of the consequences of ignoring "leakage."
PHOTO: MassShooter Warning Signs
MassShooter Warning Signs
"'Leakage' is anything that someone relays, whether consciously or unconsciously, that kind of indicates that they are having troubles, that they are troubled [and] they might want to commit a violent act against themselves or others, whether that's suicide or whether that's something as extreme as a mass shooting," said Schweit, author of the 2021 book "Stop the Killing: How to End the Mass Shooting Crisis."
PHOTO: Screen grab of an ABC video where retired FBI agent Katherine Schweit explains the phenomenon of "leakage," in which would-be active shooters offer hints of their deadly plans either online or to family and friends prior to committing violent acts.
Screen grab of an ABC News video where retired FBI agent Katherine Schweit explains the phenomenon of "leakage," in which would-be active shooters offer hi...
ABC News
In the Buffalo case, confessed killer Payton Gendron made statements about committing violence at his school, prompting law enforcement to intercede and a psychiatric evaluation to be conducted a year before he killed 10 Black people at a Tops market. In the Uvalde case, authorities identified multiple occasions where the shooter, Salvador Ramos, gave clues to friends online and to relatives of his plans to shoot up a school before he acted.
PHOTO: In this image from video provided by Leslie Bowman, Anderson Lee Aldrich surrenders to police at a home where his mother, Laura Voepel, was renting a room in Colorado Springs, Colo., June 18, 2021. 
In this image from video provided by Leslie Bowman, Anderson Lee Aldrich surrenders to police at a home where his mother, Laura Voepel, was renting a room in C...
Leslie Bowman via AP
And in the Colorado Springs nightclub shooting, a judge warned in 2021 that suspect Anderson Aldrich, who had been arrested for making a bomb threat, needed mental health treatment or "it's going to be so bad," according to court documents.
PHOTO: A memorial for the 19 children and two teachers killed in the May shooting sits outside of Robb Elementary on Oct. 24, 2022, in Uvalde, Texas.
A memorial for the 19 children and two teachers killed in the May shooting sits outside of Robb Elementary on Oct. 24, 2022, in Uvalde, Texas.
Acacia Coronado/AP
In those cases, Schweit said friends and family members, intimate partners and spouses were reluctant to report their loved ones to law enforcement.
"In the Uvalde case, authorities identified multiple occasions where the shooter had given clues to his plans," Schweit said. "Though there was a slew of examples of things that might have, in the aggregate, shown a pattern of a concern, the state report also identified that many of those were also privately known, they were personally known to family members, or friends knew them, but they weren't all put together."
PHOTO: MassShooter Warning Signs
MassShooter Warning Signs
ABC NEWS
There were 641 mass shootings in the United States in 2022, the second-highest number behind the 690 that happened in 2021, according to the Gun Violence Archive, a website that tracks shootings nationwide. The Gun Violence Archive defines a mass shooting as four or more people shot or killed, not including the shooter.
Schweit said 56% of active shooters shared their intent to commit violence in some way prior to doing so.
She said that as technology has advanced, an increasing number of active shooters have shared their deadly plans online.
"Before the social media world and before more sophisticated internet connections that we have now, a lot of these interactions and a lot of this type of information wouldn't even have been identifiable. It wouldn't have been recorded," Schweit said.
Schweit said a key to preventing mass shootings is for those who noticed warning signs in advance to set aside their desire to be "protective" of their troubled loved ones and realize they could be saving that person's life by contacting law enforcement.
"If I said to you as a parent, 30% to 40% of these shooters want to kill themselves, as well as other people, and by reporting your concern about your child or your husband you could save their life or the lives of those around you, you might react differently," Schweit said.

Higher rates of mass shootings in US states with more relaxed gun control laws
Widening gap in deaths emerging between these states and those with more restrictive laws
US states with more relaxed gun control laws and higher rates of gun ownership have higher rates of mass shootings, reveals a time trends analysis, published today in The BMJ.
And the gap in the rate of mass shootings between these states and those with more restrictive laws seems to have widened in recent years, the findings show.
Previous research suggests that more relaxed (‘permissive’) state laws and greater numbers of gun owners are linked to higher rates of gun deaths by murder and suicide.
But despite the seemingly disproportionate occurrence of mass shootings in some states and not in others, it’s not clear how legislation and ownership might influence this.
To try and explore this further, the researchers used the 1998-2015 editions of the Traveler’s Guide to the Firearms Laws of the Fifty States.
This guide, which is published annually, scores the firearm laws for each of the 50 US states, from 0 (completely restrictive) to 100 (completely permissive).
The score is derived from 13 different factors, including permit requirements; magazine capacity (for semi-automatics); if and where guns can be carried and kept; and whether the right to self defence is enshrined in the state legislation.
To gauge the level of gun ownership, which is not directly surveyed across all 50 states, the researchers used Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data on the percentage of suicides committed using a firearm, as a proxy measure.
Data on mass shootings in each state, bar Florida, were obtained from the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s (FBI’s) Uniform Crime Reporting System for the years 1998 to 2015.
Between 1998 and 2014, the average score for each state, irrespective of whether it was ‘restrictive’ or ‘permissive,’ shifted towards greater permissiveness by 0.16 units every year.
Massachusetts had the most restrictive gun laws, while Vermont had the most relaxed ones throughout this period, during which 344 mass shootings occurred.
Around three out of four of these (263; 76.5%) were classified as ‘non-domestic’ to include acquaintances, employees, employers, friends, neighbours, strangers, and extended family members.
The remainder (81; 23.5%) were classified as ‘domestic’ where the victims were first degree relatives or partners.
Yearly changes in the rates of mass shootings showed that, on average, restrictive states had lower rates of mass shootings than most permissive states, for most years.
And from 2010 onwards, the gap between permissive and restrictive states started to widen, with rates falling in restrictive states and rising in permissive states.
Levels of gun ownership were also significantly associated with mass shooting rates.
After taking account of key factors, a 10 unit increase in state gun law permissiveness, as defined by the scale, was associated with an 11.5% higher rate of mass shootings.
These findings held true, even when different factors were accounted for and whether or not the mass shootings were perpetrated by someone in a close relationship with the victims.
And a 10% increase in gun ownership was associated with a more than 35% higher rate of mass shootings.
“On the absolute scale, this means that a state like California, which has approximately two mass shootings per year, will have an extra mass shooting for every 10 unit increase in permissiveness over five years,” explain the researchers.
“It will also have three to five more mass shootings per five years for every 10 unit increase in gun ownership,” they add.
This is an observational study, and as such, can’t establish cause, added to which the scoring system used has not been validated, although it was drawn up by lawyers for gun owners. Concerns have been voiced about potential under reporting to the FBI crime reporting system, note the researchers.
Nevertheless, they conclude: “Our analyses show that US state gun laws have become more permissive in recent decades, and that a growing divide in rates of mass shootings appears to be emerging between restrictive and permissive states.

Another mass shooting highlights America’s stubborn gun control divide
Paul LeBlanc
Flowers and balloons have been placed near the scene of a mass shooting at a Walmart in Chesapeake, Virginia.
A version of this story appears in CNN’s What Matters newsletter. To get it in your inbox, sign up for free here.
Washington CNN  —  none
America’s shameful tradition of gun violence reared its ugly ahead again Tuesday evening at a Walmart in Chesapeake, Virginia.
At least six people were killed in the store, according to local officials, with four more victims in area hospitals.
This follows a shooting at the University of Virginia that left three dead less than two weeks ago, and, even more recently, a shooting at a Colorado Springs LGBTQ nightclub that left five dead.
It’s hard not to view each incident as yet another result of America’s polarized gun debate.
Many Americans hold their right to bear arms, enshrined in the US Constitution, as sacrosanct. But others say that right threatens another: the right to life.
Each shooting seems to entrench everyone’s respective convictions.
Watch Glenn Youngkin closely
In an all too familiar cycle, a shooting will prompt some to push for more gun control and others to lobby for less firearm regulation. A tense debate plays out before the issue fades from the national conversation.
Then another shooting occurs – and we start the cycle over again.
President Joe Biden on Wednesday again called for congressional action, but the reality of a divided Congress come January makes this unlikely.
“This year, I signed the most significant gun reform in a generation, but that is not nearly enough. We must take greater action,” the president said in a statement.
The more interesting political response to watch is Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin, who has been touted by some as future power player in Republican politics.
“Our hearts break with the community of Chesapeake this morning. I remain in contact with law enforcement officials throughout this morning and have made available any resources as this investigation moves forward. Heinous acts of violence have no place in our communities,” Youngkin tweeted Wednesday morning.
His message closely echoes his response to the University of Virginia shooting. “I know that there’s nothing that can be said, there’s nothing that can be done in order to bring them any kind of comfort today. And so, I think this is a moment for us to come together to support them, pray for them, recognize that as a community this is a chance to come together and grieve and support them. It’s just horrific, there’s no other way to describe it,” Youngkin said at a makeshift memorial at the school.
On Thanksgiving, Youngkin also asked his state in a tweet to “lift up in prayer” the families of those killed in the mass shootings.
Missing from his responses – heartfelt as they may be – is any mention of guns.
If Youngkin is indeed the Republican Party’s future “unifier,” it doesn’t appear that will extend into gun control.
More guns, more gun violence
There is a direct correlation in states with weaker gun laws and higher rates of gun deaths, including homicides, suicides and accidental killings, according to a January study published by Everytown for Gun Safety, a nonprofit focused on gun violence prevention.
Yet the political debate on gun control in America often becomes untethered from the data.
Consider this: There have been at least 607 mass shootings through November 22 this year, defined as one in which at least four people are shot. That’s just short of the 638 mass shootings in the country at this point last year – the worst year on record since the nonprofit Gun Violence Archive began tracking them in 2014. There were a total of 690 mass shootings in 2021.
The United States is likely to soon surpass the total of 610 mass shootings in 2020, with more than a month left of 2022 to go.
What’s worse is the direction the data is trending. Per the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the firearm homicide rate was 8.3% higher in 2021 than it was in 2020. Firearm suicide rates among people 10 years old and older also increased by 8.3% from 2020 to 2021. And the percentage of homicides attributed to firearm injuries rose from 79% in 2020 to 81% in 2021, the highest percentage in more than 50 years.
It certainly doesn’t have to be this way. Countries that have introduced laws to reduce gun-related deaths have achieved significant changes, a previous, in-depth CNN analysis found:
Australia. Less than two weeks after Australia’s worst mass shooting, the federal government implemented a new program, banning rapid-fire rifles and shotguns, and unifying gun owner licensing and registrations across the country. In the next 10 years gun deaths in Australia fell by more than 50%. A 2010 study found the government’s 1997 buyback program – part of the overall reform – led to an average drop in firearm suicide rates of 74% in the five years that followed.
South Africa. Gun-related deaths almost halved over a 10-year-period after new gun legislation, the Firearms Control Act of 2000, went into force in July 2004. The new laws made it much more difficult to obtain a firearm.
New Zealand. Gun laws were swiftly amended after the 2019 Christchurch mosque shootings. Just 24 hours after the attack, in which 51 people were killed, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced that the law would change. New Zealand’s parliament voted almost unanimously to change the country’s gun laws less than a month later, banning all military-style semi-automatic weapons.
Britain. (The country) tightened its gun laws and banned most private handgun ownership after a mass shooting in 1996, a move that saw gun deaths drop by almost a quarter over a decade.
But America’s relationship to guns is unique, and our gun culture is a global outlier. For now, the deadly cycle of violence seems destined to continue.
What has the federal government done?
As a reminder, Biden signed into law the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act in June after the House and the Senate approved the measure. The package represents the most significant federal legislation to address gun violence since the expired 10-year assault weapons ban of 1994.
“God willing, it’s going to save a lot of lives,” Biden said at the White House as he signed the bill.
The package includes $750 million to help states implement and run crisis intervention programs, which can be used to manage red flag programs, as well as for other crisis intervention programs such as mental health, drug courts and veteran courts.
Red flag laws, approved by the federal measure, are also known as Extreme Risk Protection Order laws. They allow courts to temporarily seize firearms from anyone believed to be a danger to themselves or others.
The legislation encourages states to include juvenile records in the National Instant Criminal Background Check System, which would provide a more comprehensive background check for people between 18 and 21 who want to buy guns.
It also requires more individuals who sell guns as primary sources of income to register as Federally Licensed Firearm Dealers, which are required to administer background checks before they sell a gun to someone.
The law bars guns from anyone convicted of a domestic violence crime who has a “continuing serious relationship of a romantic or intimate nature.” The law, however, allows those convicted of misdemeanor domestic violence crimes to restore their gun rights after five years if they haven’t committed other crimes.
On Thursday, Biden told reporters that he would work with Congress “to try to get rid of assault weapons.”
Pressed on whether he would try to do so during the lame duck session, he said, “I’m going to do it whenever – I’ve got to make that assessment as soon as I get in and start counting the votes.”
Congress returns next week with a jam-packed to-do list in the lame duck session, focused primarily on the must-pass government funding bill, as well as other priorities. But any action on gun legislation – particularly the assault weapons ban Biden has repeatedly called for – does not have the votes to pass. And the reality of a divided Congress in next year’s session makes it highly unlikely that anything will pass over the next two years.

U.S. Gun Policy: Global Comparisons
The United States is witnessing another year of record gun violence, raising domestic and international scrutiny of its comparatively loose gun laws and placing pressure on lawmakers to enact meaningful reforms.
Introduction
The debate over gun control in the United States has waxed and waned over the years, stirred by frequent mass shootings in civilian settings. Gun violence is the leading cause of death for children and young adults in the United States. In particular, the ready availability of assault weapons and ammunition has provoked national discussion after multiple mass shootings of school children, most recently in Uvalde, Texas. However, Congress has repeatedly been unable to pass meaningful gun legislation in the wake of these tragedies despite broad public support for new restrictions.
Recent years have seen some of the worst gun violence in U.S. history. In 2021, guns killed more than forty-five thousand Americans, the highest toll in decades; and the upward trend is on track to continue.
Many gun control advocates say the United States should look to the experiences of wealthy democratic peers that have instituted tighter restrictions to curb gun violence.
United States
Gun ownership in the United States is rooted in the Second Amendment of the Constitution: “A well-regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.”
The United States, with less than 5 percent of the world’s population, has 46 percent of the world’s civilian-owned guns, according to the most recent report by the Switzerland-based Small Arms Survey (2018). It ranks number one in firearms per capita. The United States also has the highest homicide-by-firearm rate of the world’s most-developed nations. Many gun rights proponents say these statistics do not indicate a causal relationship.
However, the right to bear arms is not unlimited. The U.S. Congress and state legislatures have authority to enact controlling legislation, and the U.S. Supreme Court has upheld some firearms restrictions, such as bans on concealed weapons and on the possession of certain types of weapons, as well as prohibitions on the sale of guns to certain categories of people. The Gun Control Act of 1968 prohibits individuals under eighteen years of age, convicted criminals, the mentally disabled, dishonorably discharged military personnel, and others from purchasing firearms. In 1993, the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act mandated background checks for all unlicensed individuals purchasing a firearm from a federally authorized dealer.
But some gun laws have not survived judicial review. For instance, in 2008, the Supreme Court struck down a Washington, DC, law that banned handguns, the court’s first ruling on the Second Amendment in nearly seventy years.
Federal law provides the basis for firearms regulation in the United States, but states and cities can impose further restrictions. Some studies have indicated that states with more restrictive gun laws, such as California or Hawaii, have lower incidences of gun deaths, although researchers say more analysis is needed.
In recent years, Congress has debated changes to existing gun laws, typically in the immediate aftermath of a high-profile mass shooting, such as that in Las Vegas in 2017 (sixty people killed), or in Parkland, Florida, in 2018 (seventeen killed). But in almost every instance, legislation has failed to garner enough support. Ill-fated bills have proposed measures including an assault weapons ban, expanded background checks, and a prohibition on firearm sales to people on federal terrorism watch lists.
As of mid-2022, there were no federal laws banning semiautomatic assault weapons, military-style .50 caliber rifles, handguns, or large-capacity magazines. There was also no federal requirement for those purchasing a gun to have any firearm safety training. There was a federal prohibition on assault weapons and on large-capacity magazines between 1994 and 2004, but Congress allowed these restrictions to expire.
Meanwhile, gun violence has surged amid the COVID-19 pandemic. As of June 2022, guns have killed some nineteen thousand people in the United States this year. The majority of those were in acts of suicide. Mass shootings—those with at least four victims—were occurring at a rate of at least one per day.
Canada
Gun ownership is also relatively high in Canada, at about thirty-five firearms per hundred residents (ranking fifth globally), but the country does not struggle with a similar level of gun violence. As in the United States, Canada’s national government sets gun restrictions that the provinces, territories, and municipalities can supplement. And like its southern neighbor, Canada’s gun laws have often been prompted by gun violence. In 1989, a student armed with a semiautomatic rifle killed fourteen students and injured more than a dozen others at a Montreal engineering school. The incident is widely credited with driving major gun reforms that imposed a twenty-eight-day waiting period for purchases; mandatory safety training courses; more detailed background checks; bans on large-capacity magazines; and bans or greater restrictions on military-style firearms and ammunition.
Firearms in Canada are divided into three classes: nonrestricted weapons, such as ordinary rifles and shotguns; restricted, such as handguns and semiautomatic rifles or shotguns; and prohibited, such as automatic weapons. It is illegal to own a fully automatic weapon unless it was registered before 1978.
Changes to the law in 1995 required individuals to obtain a license to buy guns and ammunition, as well as register all firearms. However, in 2012, the requirement to register nonrestricted guns was dropped, and related public records were expunged. Following another mass shooting, at a Quebec City mosque in 2017, the government passed a bill to again require nonrestricted firearms to be registered and allow background checks to consider events from more than five years in the past. In 2020, after a gunman killed twenty-two people in Canada’s deadliest mass shooting, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau announced a ban on “assault-style” firearms.. The legislation also required those who owned now-prohibited firearms to either participate in a buyback program or comply with a strict storage regime.
Australia
The inflection point for modern gun control in Australia was the Port Arthur massacre of 1996, when a young man killed thirty-five people and wounded nearly two dozen others. The rampage, perpetrated with a semiautomatic rifle, was the worst mass shooting in the nation’s history. Less than two weeks later, the conservative-led national government pushed through fundamental changes to the country’s gun laws in cooperation with the various states and territories, which regulate firearms.
The National Agreement on Firearms [PDF] all but prohibited automatic and semiautomatic assault rifles, mandated licensing and registration, and instituted a temporary gun buyback program that took some 650,000 assault weapons (about one-sixth of the national stock) out of public circulation. Among other things, the law also required licensees to demonstrate a “genuine need” for a particular type of gun and take a firearm safety course. After another high-profile shooting, in Melbourne in 2002, Australia’s handgun laws were tightened as well. Many analysts said these measures were highly effective, citing declines in gun-death rates and gun-related mass killings.
Following an uptick in gun sales in 2017, however, Australian gun control advocates warned against the easing of gun laws in some states and territories. The gun safety discussion was also influenced by the suspected murder-suicide of a family of seven in Western Australia, the country’s worst mass shooting in two decades. Today, Australia has more guns in circulation than before the Port Arthur massacre, although the number of people who own them has fallen over the same period.
Israel
Military service is compulsory in Israel, and guns are a part of many Israelis’ daily lives. Much of the population has indirect access to an assault weapon by either being a soldier or a reservist or a relative of one. By law, most eighteen-year-olds are drafted into the military, psychologically screened, and provided at least some weapons training after high school. After serving typically two or three years in the armed forces, however, most Israelis are discharged and subject to civilian gun laws.
The country has relatively strict gun regulations, including an assault-weapons ban, a requirement to register ownership with the government, and a limit of one gun per owner. To obtain a gun license, an applicant must be an Israeli citizen or permanent resident; speak at least some Hebrew, Israel’s official language; and pass a health screening. The minimum-age requirements vary: twenty-seven years old for citizens with no military or national-service experience, twenty-one for those who have served, and forty-five for permanent residents who are not citizens. Applicants must also show genuine cause to carry a firearm, such as self-defense or hunting.
United Kingdom
Modern gun control efforts in the United Kingdom (UK) have also been precipitated by extraordinary acts of violence that sparked public outrage. In 1987, a lone gunman armed with two semiautomatic rifles and a handgun went on a six-hour shooting spree roughly seventy miles west of London, killing more than a dozen people and then himself. In the wake of the incident, known as the Hungerford massacre, Britain introduced the Firearms (Amendment) Act, which expanded the list of banned weapons, including certain semiautomatic rifles, and increased registration requirements for other weapons.
A gun-related tragedy in the Scottish town of Dunblane in 1996 prompted Britain’s strictest gun laws yet. A man armed with four handguns shot and killed sixteen schoolchildren and one adult before committing suicide in the country’s worst mass shooting to date. The incident sparked a public campaign known as the Snowdrop Petition, which helped drive legislation banning handguns, with few exceptions. The government also instituted a temporary gun buyback program, which many credit with taking tens of thousands of illegal or unwanted guns out of supply. 
A large majority of police officers in the UK do not carry firearms, setting them apart from counterparts in the United States and other countries. Guns are limited to specially trained police units that respond to particular emergencies or deploy for certain types of operations. Supporters of the policy say the unarmed officer symbolizes policing of the public by consent as opposed to by force.
Norway
Gun control had rarely been much of a political issue in Norway—where gun laws are viewed as tough, but ownership rates are high—until a right-wing extremist killed seventy-seven people in attacks in Oslo and at an island summer camp in 2011. Though Norway ranks fourteenth worldwide in gun ownership, according to Small Arms Survey, it placed near the bottom in gun homicide rates. (The U.S. rate is roughly forty-four times higher.) Most Norwegian police, like the British, do not carry firearms.
In the wake of the tragedy, some analysts in the United States cited the rampage as proof that strict gun laws—which in Norway include requiring applicants to be at least eighteen years of age, specify a “valid reason” for gun ownership, and obtain a government license—are ineffective. Other gun control critics have argued that had other Norwegians, including the police, been armed, the gunman might have been stopped earlier and killed fewer victims. 
After the massacre, an independent commission recommended tightening Norway’s gun restrictions in various ways, including by prohibiting pistols and semiautomatic weapons, but changes were not made. In 2018, the Norwegian parliament approved a ban on semiautomatic firearms, which took effect in 2021.
Japan
Gun control advocates regularly cite Japan’s highly restrictive firearm regulations in tandem with its extraordinarily low gun death rate. Most years, fewer than one hundred Japanese die from gun violence in a country of 125 million people. Most guns are illegal in the country and ownership rates, which are quite low, reflect this.
Under Japan’s firearm and sword law [PDF], the only guns permitted are shotguns, air guns, guns with specific research or industrial purposes, or those used for competitions. However, before access to these specialty weapons is granted, one must obtain formal instruction and pass a battery of written, mental, and drug tests and a rigorous background check. Furthermore, owners must inform the authorities of how their weapons and ammunition are stored and provide their firearms for annual inspection.
Some analysts link Japan’s aversion to firearms with its demilitarization in the aftermath of World War II. Others say that because the overall crime rate in the country is so low, most Japanese see no need for firearms.

The Looser a State's Gun Laws, the More Mass Shootings It Has
Researchers have begun to see a trend: The rate of mass shootings is consistently much higher for places with fewer restrictions on guns.
Megan MolteniAug 6, 2019 3:11 PM
man outside scoping memorial
The country is splitting into the gun law-haves, and the gun law have-nots, and deadly statistics are now revealing the impact those policy decisions have on people’s lives.John Minchillo/Getty Images
It happened again. This time, gunmen in El Paso, Texas, and Dayton, Ohio, murdered 31 people and injured at least 50 more in separate mass shooting attacks within 13 hours of each other Saturday night and Sunday morning. It was, in many ways, just another weekend in America, the only nation in the developed world where horrific gun massacres regularly occur. Though nothing new, the frequency of such public mass shootings appears to have accelerated over the past five years, along with larger and more tragic death tolls. According to one recent analysis by The Washington Post, a mass shooting event has claimed the lives of four or more people every 47 days since June 2015. In the mid-’90s, such attacks happened just twice a year, on average.
But this surge in public executions has not swept across all corners of the country equally. Hawaii, for instance, hasn’t seen a mass shooting since 1999. Florida, on the other hand, has had six such incidents, defined by the US government as four or more people killed by a single individual, in the past three years alone, according to data from the nonprofit Gun Violence Archive. And like other forms of gun violence—including homicide, suicide, and unintended accidents—researchers are finding that mass shooting events happen more often in states with looser gun laws.
Because while Congress may not have passed any national gun laws in the aftermath of past mass shootings, individual state legislatures have. And as the disparity between states with weak gun laws and those with tough ones has widened, so too has the gap in mass shootings. Which means that terrorist acts like those committed in El Paso and Dayton over the weekend are more likely to keep happening to people who live in places where it’s easy to buy, sell, and carry guns. The country is splitting into the gun law haves and the gun law have-nots, and deadly statistics are now revealing the impact those policy decisions have on people’s lives.
Studying mass shootings, which make up only a tiny fraction of all gun deaths, has long been tricky, because of their historical rarity and a general dearth of data on guns or gun deaths. (That’s because of research-stifling federal legislation that was only recently overturned.) But one ironic effect of there being more mass shootings lately is scientists now have enough data to start to see trends emerging.
In a paper published earlier this year in BMJ (previously the British Medical Journal), epidemiologists at Columbia University looked back at the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s crime database from 1998 to 2015 to calculate annual rates of mass shootings in each state. Then they matched that up against each year’s edition of the Traveler’s Guide to the Firearms Laws of the Fifty States—an annual report that tracks any changes to gun laws in all 50 states and rates each one on their permissiveness. Published by a Kentucky attorney and arms dealer for a gun-toting audience, the guide is frequently promoted by the National Rifle Association. States are scored zero (for completely restrictive) to 100 (for completely permissive) based on 13 factors, including the right to carry guns in the open, limitations on the types of guns state residents can own, and whether out-of-state gun permits are recognized.
What the researchers found was that over time states have dug themselves into a bimodal distribution. That is, they’ve self-clumped into two distinct groups—a smaller one made up of eight states scoring between 5 and 25, and another, much larger, one clustered around scores from 70 to 100. “One of the most interesting things about this data is that we aren’t seeing a full spectrum, because there just aren’t that many states directly in the middle,” says Paul Reeping, the study’s lead author.
When they compared those scores to mass shootings per million residents, they found that for every 10-point relaxation in a state’s gun laws, the rates of mass shootings in that state increased by 11.5 percent. This trend showed up even after the models were adjusted for population demographics like household income, unemployment, poverty, education, incarceration rates, and race. The eight most restrictive states include Hawaii, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Connecticut, Maryland, California, Illinois, and New York. Leading the pack in both permissive laws and mass shooting rate were Vermont, South Carolina, Louisiana, and Arizona. (Florida, where the Parkland shooting took place last year, was the only state not included in the analysis because it doesn’t participate in the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting program.)
Both Texas and Ohio, where the latest terror attacks were carried out, also scored high on gun law permissibility. In both states it’s legal to carry concealed weapons in public, provided the gun owner has the proper permits to own it. In Texas, permits are issued to applicants over the age of 21 who pass a four-to-six-hour training course and don’t have any pending criminal charges. According to Ohio’s gun laws, residents 21 years and older must complete an eight-hour training course, not be addicted to any controlled substances, and be able to pass a criminal background check.
Most relevant to the recent killings in El Paso and Dayton, though, is the fact that the semiautomatic weapons used to carry out the attacks can be purchased legally. Only six states and the District of Columbia have enacted bans on these types of military-style firearms. Texas and Ohio are not among them. Both states also allow large-capacity magazines like those the gunmen in both El Paso and Dayton appear to have used to fire dozens of rounds in seconds without having to reload.
It’s worth noting here that while living in a state with strict gun laws does appear to confer some significant public health advantages—fewer gun-related suicides and homicides; one recent study found it cut rates of premature deaths in half—those laws only go so far. Motivated individuals will find ways around them, either over the internet or across porous state borders. The gunman who killed three people in Gilroy, California, in July, for example, traveled to Nevada to buy a military-style rifle configured in a way that was illegal in his home state.
And this type of thing happens a lot. Second Amendment activists often point to Chicago, a city with rampant gun violence in a state that has some of the nation’s strongest gun laws. But most of the guns recovered in Chicago were purchased outside Illinois, in neighboring states with laxer laws, according to a 2017 report by the Chicago Mayor’s Office.
But at least according to Reeping’s analysis, the trend of more permissive laws being linked to more mass shootings is actually gaining momentum. Starting around 2010, the data begins really diverging—mass shooting rates dropped in states with restrictive laws as they accelerated in states with more lax ones.
Reeping says this could be related to polarizing trends in gun policy-making, as generally permissive states make their laws more relaxed and restrictive states clamp down tighter and tighter in the face of rising violence. In Texas, for instance, where four of the ten deadliest mass shootings in US history have taken place, ten new pro-gun laws are set to take effect before the end of the month. The associations are strong, though Reeping shies away from suggesting any causality in the data. “There’s so much going on and we can’t control for everything,” he says. But as an epidemiologist he gets frustrated that the American public is willing to believe every study that suggests coffee is associated with living longer or that eating chocolate is linked to lower rates of depression but view the data linking gun laws to gun violence with suspicion.
“Right now we can only do associational studies because there isn’t the money to do the larger, more prospective studies that could answer these questions definitively,” he says. “But even now we have very, very strong indicators based off the number of studies published that more permissive gun laws really do have an effect.”

America’s unique, enduring gun problem, explained
The factors that lead to tragedies like the one in Colorado Springs are deeply ingrained in US politics, culture, and law.
Nicole NareaNov 23, 2022, 10:30am EST
 A young person in a black hoodie kneels, leaning heavily on a red cane, before a candle lit array of varied flowers. Behind them stands a group of people, also in dark clothes, many holding candles.
Mourners gather at a vigil for those killed and wounded in a shooting at Colorado Springs’ Club Q.
Scott Olson/Getty Imagesnone
The past few weeks have been a horrific reminder of the United States’ problem with mass shootings.
On Tuesday, a gunman allegedly killed six people and injured four at a Walmart in Chesapeake, Virginia. That came just days after a 22-year-old man allegedly killed five people and wounded 18 more at an LGBTQ nightclub in Colorado Springs, Colorado. And earlier this month, a shooter allegedly targeted members of the University of Virginia football team, killing three people and injuring two others as students traveled back to Charlottesville from a school trip to Washington, DC.
These incidents are among more than 600 mass shootings — an incident during which four or more people are shot, as defined by the Gun Violence Archive — that have taken place in the US this year. They follow shootings at a Fourth of July parade in Highland Park, Illinois this summer; at a hospital in Tulsa, Oklahoma in June; at an elementary school in Uvalde, Texas in May; and at a supermarket in Buffalo, New York in May.
No other high-income country has suffered such a high death toll from gun violence. Every day, more than 110 Americans die at the end of a gun, including suicides and homicides, an average of 40,620 per year. Since 2009, there has been an annual average of 19 shootings in which at least four people are killed. The US gun homicide rate is as much as 26 times that of other high-income countries; its gun suicide rate is nearly 12 times higher.
Gun control opponents have typically framed the gun violence epidemic in the US as a symptom of a broader mental health crisis.
But every country has people with mental health issues and extremists; those problems aren’t unique. What is unique is the US’s expansive view of civilian gun ownership, ingrained in politics, in culture, and in the law since the nation’s founding, and a national political process that has so far proved incapable of changing that norm.
“America is unique in that guns have always been present, there is wide civilian ownership, and the government hasn’t claimed more of a monopoly on them,” said David Yamane, a professor at Wake Forest University who studies American gun culture.
Earlier this year, Congress reached a deal on limited gun reforms for the first time in nearly 30 years. But the recent shootings underscore just how embedded gun violence is in the US.
The US has a lot of guns, and more guns means more gun deaths
It’s hard to estimate the number of privately owned guns in America since there is no countrywide database where people register whether they own guns, and there is a thriving black market for them in the absence of strong federal gun trafficking laws.
One estimate from the Small Arms Survey, a Swiss-based research project, found that there were approximately 390 million guns in circulation in the US in 2018, or about 120.5 firearms per 100 residents. That number has likely climbed in the years since, given that one in five households purchased a gun during the pandemic. But even without accounting for that increase, US gun ownership is still well above any other country: Yemen, which has the world’s second-highest level of gun ownership, has only 52.8 guns per 100 residents; in Iceland, it’s 31.7.
American guns are concentrated in a tiny minority of households: just 3 percent own about half the nation’s guns, according to a 2016 Harvard and Northeastern University study. They’re called “super owners” who have an average of 17 guns each. Gallup, using a different methodology, found that 42 percent of American households overall owned guns in 2021.
Researchers have found a clear link between gun ownership in the US and gun violence, and some argue that it’s causal. One 2013 Boston University-led study, for instance, found that for each percentage point increase in gun ownership at the household level, the state firearm homicide rate increased by 0.9 percent. And states with weaker gun laws have higher rates of gun-related homicides and suicides, according to a January study by the gun control advocacy group Everytown for Gun Safety.
The link between gun deaths and gun ownership is much stronger than the link between violence and mental health issues. If it were possible to cure all schizophrenia, bipolar, and depressive disorders, violent crime in the US would fall by only 4 percent, according to a study from Duke University professor Jeffrey Swanson, who examines policies to reduce gun violence.
There’s still a pervasive idea, pushed by gun manufacturers and gun rights organizations like the National Rifle Association, that further arming America is the answer to preventing gun violence — the “good guy with a gun” theory. But a 2021 study from Hamline University and Metropolitan State University found that the rate of deaths in 133 mass school shootings between 1980 and 2019 was 2.83 times greater in cases where there was an armed guard present.
“The idea that the solution to mass shootings is that we need more guns in the hands of more people in more places so that we’ll be able to protect ourselves — there’s no evidence that that’s true,” Swanson said.
Church members after a Mass at Sacred Heart Catholic Church in Uvalde, Texas, on May 25, one day after a gunman in body armor killed 19 children and two teachers at Robb Elementary School.
Allison Dinner/AFP via Getty Imagesnone
The prevalence of the self-defense narrative is part of what sets apart the gun rights movement in the US from similar movements in places like Canada and Australia, according to Robert Spitzer, a professor at SUNY Cortland who studies the politics of gun control.
Self-defense has become by far the most prominent reason for gun ownership in the US today, eclipsing hunting, recreation, or owning guns because they’re antiques, heirlooms, or work-related. That’s also reflected in ballooning handgun sales, since the primary purpose of those guns isn’t recreational, but self-defense.
American gun culture “brings together the hunting-sporting tradition with the militia-frontier tradition, but in modern times the hunting element has been eclipsed by a heavily politicized notion that gun carrying is an expression of freedom, individuality, hostility to government, and personal self-protection,” Spitzer said.
That culture of gun ownership in the US has made it all the more difficult to explore serious policy solutions to gun violence after mass shootings. In high-income countries lacking that culture, mass shootings have historically galvanized public support behind gun control measures that would seem extreme by US standards.
Canada banned military-style assault weapons two weeks after a 2020 mass shooting in Nova Scotia. In 2019, less than a month after the Christchurch massacre, New Zealand lawmakers passed a gun buyback scheme, as well as restrictions on AR-15s and other semiautomatic weapons, and they later established a firearms registry. The 1996 Port Arthur massacre in Australia spurred the government to buy back 650,000 firearms within a year, and murders and suicides plummeted as a result.
By contrast, nearly a decade passed after the 2012 school shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, before Congress passed a new gun control law. The Bipartisan Safer Communities Act, the law passed in June 2022, was relatively limited: it did not ban any types of weapons, instead incentivizing states to enact new measures meant to limit who can access guns.
People gather at Sacred Heart Catholic Church to pray for the victims of the mass shooting at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas, on May 25.
Chandan Khanna/AFP via Getty Imagesnone
“Other countries look at this problem and say, ‘People walking around in the community with handguns is just way too dangerous, so we’re going to broadly limit legal access to that and make exceptions on the margins for people who might have a good reason to have a gun,’” Swanson said. “Here we do just the opposite: We say that, because of the way that the Supreme Court interpreted the Second Amendment, everybody has the right to a gun for personal protection, and then we tried to make exceptions for really dangerous people, but we can’t figure out who they are.”
While the majority of Americans support more gun control restrictions, including universal background checks, a vocal Republican minority unequivocally opposes such laws — and is willing to put pressure on GOP lawmakers to do the same. Alongside the NRA, and a well-funded gun lobby, this contingent of voters sees gun control as a deciding issue, and one that could warrant a primary challenge for a lawmaker who votes for it.
The gun lobby has the advantage of enthusiasm. “​​Despite being outnumbered, Americans who oppose gun control are more likely to contact public officials about it and to base their votes on it,” Barnard College’s Matthew Lacombe explained in 2020. “As a result, many politicians believe that supporting gun regulation is more likely to lose them votes than to gain them votes.”
American flags are seen at half-staff surrounding the Washington Monument, in front of the US Capitol, on May 25. President Joe Biden ordered flags at the White House, federal buildings, and military posts to be flown at half-staff for the victims of the deadly shooting at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas.
Kent Nishimura/Los Angeles Times via Getty Imagesnone
Congress in June passed a bipartisan gun safety bill for the first time since the 1990s. But the new law — which incentivized states to pass red flag laws, enhanced background checks for gun buyers under 21, and closed the “boyfriend loophole” which allowed some people with domestic violence convictions to purchase guns — is not sufficient to fully address the causes of mass shootings. Certain studies suggest that even truly universal background checks may have limited effects on gun violence.
The Supreme Court has made it impossible to cure America’s gun violence epidemic
In 2008, the Supreme Court effectively wrote NRA CEO Wayne LaPierre’s “good guy with a gun” theory into the Constitution. The Court’s 5-4 decision in District of Columbia v. Heller (2008) was the first Supreme Court decision in American history to hold that the Second Amendment protects an individual right to possess a firearm. But it also went much further than that.
Heller held that one of the primary purposes of the Second Amendment is to protect the right of individuals — good guys with a gun, in LaPierre’s framework — to use firearms to stop bad guys with guns. As Justice Antonin Scalia wrote in Heller, an “inherent right of self-defense has been central to the Second Amendment right.”
As a matter of textual interpretation, this holding makes no sense. The Second Amendment provides that “a well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.”
We don’t need to guess why the Second Amendment protects a right to firearms because it is right there in the Constitution. The Second Amendment’s purpose is to preserve “a well-regulated Militia,” not to allow individuals to use their weapons for personal self-defense.
For many years, the Supreme Court took the first 13 words of the Second Amendment seriously. As the Court said in United States v. Miller (1939), the “obvious purpose” of the Second Amendment was to “render possible the effectiveness” of militias. And thus the amendment must be “interpreted and applied with that end in view.” Heller abandoned that approach.
Heller also reached another important policy conclusion. Handguns, according to Scalia, are “overwhelmingly chosen” by gun owners who wish to carry a firearm for self-defense. For this reason, he wrote, handguns enjoy a kind of super-legal status. Lawmakers are not allowed to ban what Scalia described as “the most preferred firearm in the nation to ‘keep’ and use for protection of one’s home and family.”
This declaration regarding handguns matters because this easily concealed weapon is responsible for far more deaths than any other weapon in the United States — and it isn’t close. In 2019, for example, a total of 13,927 people were murdered in the US, according to the FBI. Of these murder victims, at least 6,368 — just over 45 percent — were killed by handguns.
A woman holds a photo of Nevaeh Bravo, who was killed in the mass shooting at Robb Elementary School, during a vigil for the victims in Uvalde, Texas, on May 25.
Allison Dinner/AFP via Getty Imagesnone
Earlier this year, the Supreme Court made it even harder for federal and state lawmakers to combat gun violence. In its decision in New York State Rifle & Pistol Association v. Bruen, it massively expanded the scope of the Second Amendment, abandons more than a decade of case law governing which gun laws are permitted by the Constitution, and replaces this case law with a new legal framework that, as Justice Stephen Breyer writes in dissent, “imposes a task on the lower courts that judges cannot easily accomplish.”
The immediate impact of Bruen is that handguns — which are responsible for the overwhelming majority of gun murders in the United States — could proliferate on many American streets. That’s because Bruen strikes the types of laws that limit who can legally carry handguns in public, holding that “the Second and Fourteenth Amendments protect an individual’s right to carry a handgun for self-defense outside the home.”
One silver lining for proponents of gun regulation is that the majority opinion, written by Justice Clarence Thomas, embraces language that first appeared in Heller, which permits some gun laws such as prohibitions on “dangerous and unusual weapons.” Nevertheless, it placed an emphasis on historical analogies that could endanger many laws that enjoy broad bipartisan support. The future of firearm regulation looks grim for anyone who believes that the government should help protect us from gun violence.

Mass shooters exploited gun laws, loopholes before carnage
In this March 23, 2021, photo, a makeshift fence stands around the parking lot outside a King Soopers grocery store where a mass shooting took place in Boulder, Colo. The suspects in the most recent shooting sprees found it relatively easy to get their guns. The suspect in the shooting at a Boulder supermarket was convicted of assaulting a high school classmate but still got a gun.  (AP Photo/David Zalubowski)
The suspect in the shooting at a Boulder, Colorado, supermarket was convicted of assaulting a high school classmate but still got a gun. The man accused of opening fire on three massage businesses in the Atlanta area bought his gun just hours before the attack — no waiting required.
They are just the latest suspected U.S. mass shooters to obtain guns because of limited firearms laws, background check lapses or law enforcement’s failure to heed warnings of concerning behavior.
In the wake of the shootings, which together left 18 people dead, President Joe Biden renewed calls for stronger gun laws — including banning assault weapons and expanding background checks. Many Republicans oppose the measures, and the National Rifle Association blasted the discussions as a rush to “politicize this horrific situation.”
A look at how suspects in recent mass shootings obtained guns, based on police accounts, court documents and contemporaneous reporting:
BOULDER, COLORADO: MARCH 22, 2021. 10 DEAD.
Ahmad Al Aliwi Alissa bought a Ruger AR-556 pistol, a semi-automatic weapon with a capacity of up to 30 rounds, on March 16, police said. Days earlier, a judge struck down an ordinance that banned assault rifles and high-capacity magazines in Boulder, citing a state law prohibiting local gun bans. A lawsuit challenging Boulder’s ordinances had the backing of the NRA, which said the ruling gave “law-abiding gun owners something to celebrate.” Alissa was prone to sudden rage and was convicted of misdemeanor assault and sentenced to probation for attacking a high school classmate, law enforcement officials and former associates said. It was not immediately known where Alissa purchased his gun. Colorado has a universal background check law covering almost all gun sales, but that misdemeanor would not have prevented him from purchasing a weapon, experts said. Had he been convicted of a felony, his purchase would’ve been barred under federal law. Alissa is charged with 10 counts of murder.
ATLANTA: MARCH 16, 2021. 8 DEAD
Robert Aaron Long purchased a 9 mm handgun just hours before going on a shooting rampage at three massage businesses in the Atlanta area, police said. A lawyer for the gun shop said it complies with federal background check laws. Georgia, like the majority of states, has no waiting period to obtain a gun. Long claimed to have a “sex addiction,” police said, and he spent time at an addiction recovery facility last year. Federal law bans guns for people who are “unlawful users of or addicted to a controlled substance” or who’ve been court ordered to a mental health or substance abuse treatment facility, but doesn’t mention treatment for other compulsions as a barrier to ownership. Long is charged with eight counts of murder.
MIDLAND, TEXAS, AUG. 31, 2019. 7 DEAD.
Seth Aaron Ator purchased an AR-style rifle through a private sale, allowing him to evade a federal background check, and fired it indiscriminately from his car into passing vehicles and shopping plazas. He also hijacked a mail truck, killing the driver. Ator had been blocked from getting a gun in 2014 after his background check was flagged because a court determined he was mentally ill, according to a law enforcement official familiar with the matter. Private sales, which account for up to 40 percent of all gun sales according to some estimates, are not subject to a federal background check and private sellers aren’t required to determine if a buyer is eligible to own a gun. Ator was killed by police.
DAYTON, OHIO: AUG. 4, 2019. 9 DEAD.
Connor Betts’ classmates said he was suspended in high school for compiling a “hit list” and a “rape list,” but authorities said there was nothing in his background that prevented him from purchasing the AR-15-style pistol used in the shooting at Ned Peppers Bar. Ohio law requires that sealed records of any juvenile crimes be expunged either after five years or once the offender turns 23. Betts, who was 24 at the time of the shooting, bought the gun online from a Texas dealer. It was then shipped to a Dayton-area firearms dealer, in accordance with federal law. Betts was killed by police.
EL PASO, TEXAS, AUG. 3, 2019. 23 DEAD.
Patrick Crusius bought an AK-47-style rifle and 1,000 rounds of hollow-point ammunition online 45 days before the Walmart attack, prosecutors said. A Crusius family lawyer said his mother raised concerns about the purchase in a call to police on June 27. Police said she asked if Crusius, who was 21 at the time, was old enough to buy a gun. Police said she was assured he was and that he’d qualify if he passed a background check. Police said she expressed concern only about his safety and said she’d seen no recent change in his behavior. Texas does not have the kind of “red flag law” that in other states allows courts to take guns from people posing immediate danger. Crusius posted a racist screed online just before the attack and appeared to target Mexicans. He’s charged with capital murder in Texas and federal hate crimes and firearms offenses.
VIRGINIA BEACH, VIRGINIA: MAY 31, 2019. 12 DEAD.
Former Virginia Beach city employee DeWayne Craddock legally purchased six firearms in the three years before he opened fire on a municipal building, including the two .45-caliber pistols used in the attack. An independent review of the shooting, commissioned by the City of Virginia Beach, found that Craddock displayed no warning signs or “prohibited behaviors associated with a pathway to violence,” and that he had no known history of mental health treatment. Craddock was killed by police.
THOUSAND OAKS, CALIFORNIA: NOV. 7, 2018. 12 DEAD.
Ian David Long, a former Marine machine gunner who served in Afghanistan, used a legally purchased .45-caliber pistol with an extended magazine in the shooting at the Borderline Bar & Grill. California tried to outlaw high-capacity magazines, but a federal judge reversed that after a pro-gun group sued. Months before the shooting, sheriff’s deputies called to Long’s home found him acting irrationally, but a mental health specialist didn’t feel he needed to be involuntarily committed. California has a “red flag law,” but there’s no indication authorities sought a court order to take away Long’s guns. Long killed himself.
PITTSBURGH: OCT. 27, 2018. 11 DEAD.
Robert Gregory Bowers had a carry license and legally owned the Colt AR-15 SP1 and three Glock .357 handguns police said he used to kill worshipers at Tree of Life synagogue. Bowers spent months posting angry rants against Jews on Gab, a social media site favored by right-wing extremists. He also posted photos of his “glock family.” Just before the attack, he posted a screed against a Jewish organization that resettles refugees, saying: “I can’t sit by and watch my people get slaughtered. Screw your optics, I’m going in.” None of the rhetoric appeared to raise red flags. His case is pending.
SANTA FE, TEXAS: MAY. 18, 2018. 10 DEAD.
Dimitrios Pagourtzis, a 17-year-old student, used a shotgun and a .38-caliber handgun that his father purchased legally and stored in a closet at their home, authorities said. It wasn’t clear if his father knew he’d taken the guns. Prior to the attack, Pagourtzis posted a photo on social media of a T-shirt with the phrase “Born to Kill” and had writings indicating he planned to attack his high school. A judge sent him to a mental health facility after ruling he was incompetent to stand trial.
PARKLAND, FLORIDA: FEB. 14, 2018. 17 DEAD.
Nikolas Cruz legally purchased a Smith & Wesson M&P 15 rifle in February 2017 from a licensed dealer a few miles from Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, authorities said. He’d been treated at a mental health clinic but hadn’t been there in more than a year. Federal law prohibits gun purchases if a court declares a person a “mental defective” or commits them to an institution, but not if the person seeks treatment voluntarily. Federal law allows people as young as 18 to buy semi-automatic weapons. Cruz was 19 at the time of the shooting. His trial has been delayed by the coronavirus pandemic.
SUTHERLAND SPRINGS, TEXAS: NOV. 5, 2017. 25 DEAD.
Devin Patrick Kelley’s history of domestic abuse barred him from buying guns. He was able to because information about his crimes was never entered into a federal database used for background checks. The Air Force failed to follow rules requiring that it inform the FBI about his conduct. Kelley purchased four guns, including an AR-15-style rifle found at First Baptist Church, from licensed Texas and Colorado dealers over a four-year span. Kelley killed himself.
LAS VEGAS: OCT. 1, 2017. 58 DEAD.
Stephen Paddock purchased 33 of the 49 weapons found in his hotel room and at his homes in the year before he opened fire on a country music festival. Paddock passed all background checks. His gradual accumulation of guns went undetected because federal law doesn’t require licensed gun dealers to alert the government about rifle purchases. Paddock killed himself.
ORLANDO, FLORIDA: JUNE 12, 2016. 49 DEAD.
Omar Mateen purchased an AR-15-style rifle, a Sig Sauer MCX, and a handgun from a licensed dealer on separate days about a week before the Pulse nightclub attack. He passed a background check and had a security license that allowed him to be armed while on duty. The FBI investigated Mateen in 2013 and 2014 over co-workers’ concerns that he’d spoken about ties to terror groups. Neither inquiry led to charges. Even if he’d been placed on a terrorism watch list, Congress in 2015 rejected attempts to prevent people on the list from purchasing guns. Mateen was killed by police.
SAN BERNARDINO, CALIFORNIA: DEC. 2, 2015. 14 DEAD.
Syed Farook and his wife, Tashfeen Malik, used weapons the FBI said his neighbor, Enrique Marquez, legally purchased from a licensed dealer in 2011 and 2012. Marquez pleaded guilty to charges he conspired to provide support to terrorists and made false statements to acquire a firearm. He told investigators Farook asked him to buy the weapons because he would draw less attention. Farook and Malik were killed by police.
ROSEBURG, OREGON: OCT. 1, 2015. 10 DEAD.
Christopher Harper-Mercer and his family members legally purchased the handguns and rifle used in the Umpqua Community College shooting from a licensed dealer. Investigators found six guns at the college and eight at an apartment. Neighbors said Harper-Mercer and his mother went target shooting together. Harper-Mercer killed himself after he was wounded by police.
CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA: JUNE 17, 2015. 9 DEAD.
A drug arrest should’ve prevented Dylann Roof from purchasing the pistol he used at Emanuel AME Church, but a record-keeping error and background check delay enabled the transaction to go through. The FBI said a background check examiner never saw the arrest report because the wrong arresting agency was listed in state criminal history records. After three days, the gun dealer was legally permitted to complete the transaction. He was convicted and is on federal death row.
WASHINGTON, D.C.: SEPT. 16, 2013. 12 DEAD.
Aaron Alexis, a former reservist turned civilian contractor, passed background checks and legally purchased the shotgun used in the Washington Navy Yard shooting despite recent mental health treatment and a history of violent outbursts. He previously fired a gun in anger twice but wasn’t prosecuted in either case. Alexis was killed by police.
NEWTOWN, CONNECTICUT: DEC. 14, 2012. 26 DEAD.
Adam Lanza used his mother’s weapons, including a .223-caliber semi-automatic rifle, in the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School. Lanza’s mother, whom he fatally shot before going to the school, also purchased the ammunition. Lanza killed himself.
AURORA, COLORADO: JULY 20, 2012. 12 DEAD.
James Holmes was receiving psychiatric treatment when he passed required federal background checks and legally purchased the weapons he used in his movie theater assault. As in the Parkland and Navy Yard cases, treatment alone did not prevent him from buying guns. He was convicted and sentenced to 12 life terms and thousands of years in prison.